































































Using markets to leverage investment in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics


production constrained by soil degradation (Zika and Erb, 2009) and
deficits of pollination (Garibaldi et al., 2013) and pest control services
(Boyles et al., 2011; Karp et al., 2013).

In the most biologically diverse, populated and poor regions of the
planet, deforestation has been one of the main drivers of declines in
EGS to people and biodiversity loss (Hansen et al., 2013; Sloan and
Sayer, 2015). Although deforestation has declined in some tropical
regions as a consequence of effective national and international policies
and programs (Boucher et al., 2014; Nepstad et al., 2014), losses in
forest cover were so high in the past that large-scale reforestation is
now needed to safeguard the provision of essential EGS to society
(Chazdon et al., 2016b; in this article, we use reforestation in the broad
sense of returning forest overstorey to land where it has been removed).
Forest and Landscape Restoration (FLR) has emerged as a promising
activity to recover economic and ecological functionality of large ter-
ritories deteriorated by the depletion of natural resources in previously
forested landscapes (Sabogal et al., 2015). A recent assessment has
suggested that, globally, 2 billion ha of land present opportunities for
some form of FLR (WRI, 2014). Many governments and international
organizations are now promoting or drafting programs to undertake
FLR (Menz et al., 2013; Suding et al., 2015; Chazdon et al., 2016b), at
scales of hundreds of millions of hectares.

The variety of contexts and implementers creates a variety of ap-
proaches being contemplated. Some governments are primarily con-
cerned with traditional forms of reforestation, especially planting trees
in plantation monocultures to generate goods such as timber or pulp-
wood (Xu, 2011; Temperton et al., 2014). Others are more concerned
with forms of reforestation that are able to recover biodiversity and
supply the EGS once provided by the original native forests (Melo et al.,
2013). These mostly involve more complex, multi-species silvicultural
systems (Lamb, 2014; Stanturf et al., 2014). Both approaches represent
a deliberate new land use choice at a particular location. But it is also
likely that much of any future increase in tree cover, as in the past, will
be achieved through unplanned and uncertain spontaneous natural
regeneration in abandoned former agricultural areas (Aide et al., 2013;
Gilroy et al., 2014). FLR could thus include commercial monoculture
tree plantations, smallholder woodlots, shifting cultivation, agroforests,
restoration plantations and natural regeneration, each of which provide
specific outcomes for generating forest products, conserving biodi-
versity, supplying EGS, and safeguarding cultural, religious and aes-
thetic values of human groups (Chazdon et al., 2016a). FLR differs from
ecological or ecosystem restoration, which aims to assist the recovery of
native ecosystems to achieve some level of similarity to their pre-dis-
turbance species composition, structure, and functioning (SER, 2004).
Rather, FLR's ultimate goal is to re-shape highly deforested landscapes
to better meet human needs, which includes – but is not restricted to –
ecological restoration.

However, despite the growing enthusiasm for increased reforesta-
tion amongst governments and international bodies, current efforts
being undertaken by individuals and communities will not be sufficient
in itself to achieve the aspirational targets set for FLR and associated
outcomes for EGS provisioning, which rely on shifts in land use at larger
spatial scales. New policies are then needed to leverage a massive en-
gagement of landholders and unlock the potential of FLR to re-shape
vast extensions of degraded landscapes. One of the critical factors that
will likely influence the success of policies to promote FLR is their ca-
pacity to provide material benefits to those directly affected, because in
developing countries with large numbers of rural poor, reforestation
will not be a success unless it also improves livelihoods (Baynes et al.,
2015b). Financial impacts to landholders from supplying goods like
timber or receiving payments from generating one or more ecosystem
services can then make a difference (Edwards et al., 2010; Brancalion
et al., 2012). However, the scale of the reforestation effort being con-
templated is likely to be far beyond the financial capacity of many
governments, NGOs or aid agencies to support its implementation and,
thus, to generate material benefits to participants. An alternative or

complementary approach is to take advantage of the power of market
forces. If FLR is able to produce EGS with a significant financial value in
the market system, it may overcome land opportunity costs of de-
grading activities dominating landscapes and, consequently, replace
them by various forms of reforestation. Although governments alone
may not have financial capacity to support the scale of reforestation
contemplated by international FLR programs, they can develop policies
to support the transformation of FLR into a new economic activity,
broadening the basis of financial support for its successful im-
plementation. With this in mind, here we explore the potential of
markets and their interaction with policies to leverage investment for
FLR in the tropics.

2. A role of markets in promoting restoration?

Markets are human constructs, created or collapsed depending on
societal incentives and historical contexts. Exploiting markets to
achieve social change is a strategy that is more than two centuries old,
as exemplified by the sugar-boycott campaign against the British slave
trade, which begun in 1787 and finally succeeded more than half a
century later (Hochschild, 2005). Notably, in the last decade, NGO
pressure on the companies involved in trading and making products
from agricultural commodities has resulted in important zero net de-
forestation commitments from major corporations covering the large
component of global trade (Nepstad et al., 2014). The economic value
of branding and the importance of corporate image are now so great
that the mere threat of bad publicity can change the behavior of multi-
billion-dollar corporations.

The challenge is to extend such success from deforestation to re-
forestation, where the objective is not simply to end negative actions
but to create large-scale incentives for positive ones. In southeastern
Brazil, for example, agricultural companies have engaged in forest re-
storation to comply with the national Forest Code, as a pre-requisite to
obtaining environmental certification for their products and competi-
tive advantages in market (Rodrigues et al., 2011). However, such
conditions might not apply in most areas targeted for FLR. For instance,
the current land use(s) or landholders may not be integrated into the
international commodities market. At the national level, legal instru-
ments able to promote restoration may not exist or existing legislation
may not be enforced. In addition, the costs of restoration may not be
compensated adequately by the financial benefits arising from various
forms of environmental certification. Therefore, the use of restoration
to improve corporate image or access to markets does not seem to be
enough to promote FLR at the scale needed to face current environ-
mental challenges.

In other cases, markets alone are not enough, in particular in the
presence of so-called “market failures” (Sandler, 1993; Bulte and Engel,
2006; Cubbage et al., 2007). These classic economic problems include
information asymmetry, incomplete or absent markets and, crucially,
externalities. Externalities describe the benefit or harm that an action
taken by one stakeholder has on other stakeholders but is not taken into
account by the one making the decision (Fisher et al., 2009). When the
externalities are positive (as in the case of EGS provision), the failure to
take them into account leads to underinvestment and a suboptimal
provision of the service in question (Fisher et al., 2009). FLR also suffers
from incomplete or absent markets, in particular related to the EGS
provided by restoration. The economy of ecosystem services provision,
in particular, is beset by market failures, which calls for governmental
interventions such as incentive schemes, regulation and educational
campaigns (Gottfried et al., 1996; Cubbage et al., 2007).

Although the power of markets per se can be enough to unlock the
potential of FLR to receive private investments, past experiences have
shown that most emerging economic activities still require appropriate
government support, in terms of credit lines, regulations and policies, to
develop. Indeed, markets may not be sufficiently robust or stable to
initiate restoration even though the need is significant. In this context it

P.H.S. Brancalion et al. Forest Policy and Economics 85 (2017) 103–113

104

acer
Highlight

acer
Highlight



