































































Using markets to leverage investment in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics


is noticeable that some of the world's largest reforestation programs
(e.g. South Korea, China, Vietnam) have been undertaken by govern-
ment agencies. Authoritarian governments, poorly developed private
sector, and insufficient market signals to attract private investments are
factors potentially related to the predominance of public investments to
kick starting large-scale reforestation. But then, once government
sponsored restoration programs are underway and have exceeded a
critical scale, it may be possible to withdraw these government inter-
ventions, like observed now in South Korea (Lee and Miller-Rushing,
2014; Temperton et al., 2014). By this stage, technologies have been
developed and the nature of the risks involved in investing in refor-
estation is better understood.

Scale is important. Similar to other economic activities, FLR may
depend on economies of scale, with growing cost advantages with in-
creasing size of operations. In addition to affecting economic efficiency,
scale is a key issue for FLR because most of its products and services can
only be obtained at expected levels if this activity is implemented at
very large spatial extents. Therefore, FLR has to be treated by markets
and governments as a “big” field of activity, similar to agricultural
commodities production and infrastructure, and receive the type of
incentives dedicated to them. If large-scale FLR is viewed as a narrowly
focused environmental activity without appropriate consideration of its
broad potential to generate jobs and income, alleviate poverty and to
deliver EGS with economic value to society, it is likely to fail. In this
context, the Sustainable Development Goals provide a core framework
for large-scale application of the FLR agenda (Griggs et al., 2013).

Similar to other new “green” business, the “free rider problem” re-
presents another bottleneck to use markets to leverage investments in
FLR (Engel et al., 2008). This economic problem is related to the ex-
ternalities discussed before, and occur when some of the beneficiaries of
a certain intervention do not contribute towards paying for the costs of
that intervention. This problem may particularly apply to FLR, since
many of the EGS supplied are not yet paid for by those who benefit from
them. For private sector investors to be willing to invest in a FLR pro-
ject, they need to be able to capture sufficient benefits to make the
investment worthwhile. Overcoming free-riding by making the bene-
ficiaries of reforestation-produced EGS pay for them might have large
impacts in the revenue stream of such investments. The classic example
is that reforestation (or improved catchment management that restricts
agricultural practices) may improve water quality in a catchment, but
those downstream users that benefit the most (e.g. city residents) do not
need to pay for the value of this improvement. Markets have to be
structured by policies that recognize the need to improve EGS for the
quality of life of people, the costs associated to their supply, and the
benefits suppliers might receive to encourage their engagement in FLR.
In the case of ecosystem services, the polluter/payer and, especially, the
supplier/receiver principles have been used to develop the market. This
can be done directly, for example via payment for ecosystem services
schemes, or indirectly, for example by public subsidies (perhaps derived
from government-run user fees) that recognize wider societal benefits of
certain activities (Holl and Howarth, 2000; Engel et al., 2008).

Using the case of water, some cities use part of their water fees
(taxes, rates) to invest in FLR in the countryside to reinforce the pro-
vision of watershed services (Richards et al., 2015). In the case of
ecosystem goods, it is necessary to remove perverse incentives pro-
moting degrading activities (e.g. illegal logging) and establish suppor-
tive incentives for FLR in such a way that societal demand for forest
products is supplied by activities that contribute to ecosystem recovery,
rather than causing its degradation. Pilot projects are then needed to
demonstrate the potential of FLR and mobilize more audacious in-
vestors to support the first large-scale programs. However, reforestation
types have to be carefully matched to specific program goals and con-
texts to prevent failures and demonstrate the full potential of this
emerging activity to mobilize investments and generate profits (Fig. 1).
A key challenge to developing markets for FLR is matching reforestation
types, which vary in cost of implementation and the immediate direct

benefits that they provide, with appropriate stakeholder group and
market motivations. This challenge arises because each reforestation
type represents a solution for a given problem, and has to be im-
plemented based on a sound social, economic, cultural, political, eco-
logical and biophysical diagnosis (IUCN/WRI, 2014). If the wrong in-
tervention is applied to solve a given problem, failures will be likely.
We present in Table 1 an overview of different reforestation types in-
cluded in FLR and their appropriateness for specific stakeholder group
and market motivations, and describe in the next section some critical
issues to be considered for investment in some of the EGS with the
greatest potential for commercialization in FLR.

3. Markets for restoration of goods and services

Forest and landscape restoration can supply many different EGS that
have the potential to be sold. The extent to which these EGS can be
traded and at what prices vary considerably due to factors such as the
good/service type, distance from markets, scarcity within a local or
international market, transaction costs etc. Ecosystems goods and ser-
vices can be classified into many different categories (see de Groot
et al., 2002; MEA, 2005; Diaz et al., 2015), which present a useful
framework to assess their market potential in FLR. However, it is be-
yond the scope of this article to discuss all (or even most) of the po-
tential EGS. Instead we focus on a small number of EGS that have
shown to have the greatest potential for FLR. These will be further
described to better link their particular characteristics with the context
in which their exploration by markets could have higher chances of
success.

3.1. Ecosystem goods

Wood is the most easily recognized good produced from reforesta-
tion. Wood products, including firewood, timber, pulp, resins, and
others, can be produced from a range of different planting systems
under FLR, including industrial plantations, smallholder and commu-
nity forestry and agroforestry, along with regenerating secondary for-
ests (Lamb, 2014; Stanturf et al., 2014; Chazdon et al., 2016a). Each of
these reforestation systems produce different types and qualities of
wood products and have varying degrees of access to local, national and
international markets. In general, the markets for wood-based products
are well established with active national and international markets for
round logs, sawn lumber and pulp obtained from a relatively small
number of tropical species (e.g. species of Eucalyptus, Acacia and Pinus)
produced from industrial plantations.

All markets require that participants make judgments concerning
financial returns and the risks of being involved in that market. Most of
the initial reforestation undertaken to produce goods such as timber
was originally done early in the 20th century by governments, often
with financing by the World Bank, because the private sector regarded
the risks of reforestation as being too great. It was only after govern-
ment forestry departments developed appropriate silvicultural regimes
and demonstrated that tree growing could be profitable that the cor-
porate sector became involved (Lamb, 2014). Even then, many com-
panies relied not just on market conditions but on various forms of
government assistance, such as help with acquiring suitable land and
reduced taxation and other types of financial assistance (Enters et al.,
2003). Many timber companies reforesting land for the first time (c.f.
those able to buy former government-owned plantations) prefer to grow
trees on short rotations for pulpwood because the short timeframe
limits their exposure to the risks involved in growing trees on long
rotations, and in some cases, such timber companies are legally re-
quired to reforest with a single exotic timber species (e.g., in Malawi).
In short, it has taken some time for timber markets to become attractive
to the corporate sector and even then, markets alone are sometimes
insufficient to attract investments and incentives are needed.

Smaller individual landholders face the same challenge of balancing

P.H.S. Brancalion et al. Forest Policy and Economics 85 (2017) 103–113

105



