































































Using markets to leverage investment in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics


the prospective financial returns from investing in tree growing against
the risks arising from doing so. Several factors affect landholder deci-
sions. First, supply chain infrastructure, especially seedling availability
and quality, will underpin decisions about which species can be grown.
Key issues are whether or not to use the same species and reforestation
methods as corporate growers, and identifying which markets to target.
It may be feasible (or, in some instances, only possible) to use the same
species and methods if they can act as out-growers to a large corporate
timber company and supplement the timber grown in its own planta-
tions. Otherwise using similar species and methods may be a risky
option, especially if growers are some distance away from these mar-
kets, lack the economies of scale available to large companies and are
only able to harvest small volumes of timber episodically. In that case,
corporate market conditions work against them.

A second problem for small individual growers concerns timber
prices. Some smaller growers may only produce low-quality logs (e.g.
with poor form or with large knots), which will generate low prices in
local markets. It may make more sense for such growers to invest more
in management (e.g. pruning, thinning) and grow species such as those
producing high-value timbers that are able to attract higher prices and

sustain longer transport distances. But high-value timber markets can
be difficult to locate. Where there has been a tradition of using valuable
timber species harvested from native forests, their uses and wood
properties are often well-known in local markets. However, except for a
few well-known hardwoods, such as Tectona or Swietenia spp., there is
often little recognition of local indigenous high-value species in inter-
national markets.

A third problem for individual landholders considering the oppor-
tunity costs of tree-growing is that financial returns are often delayed
until many years after planting. This might be addressed by using multi-
species plantings in which fast-growing species are grown with slower-
growing species. The former could be harvested within 10 years (e.g.
for firewood), whereas the latter might be higher-value species that
take at least several decades to reach a marketable size. Harvesting the
faster-growing species not only generates an early cash-flow but acts as
a thinning to improve the growth of the slower-growing species and
reduces the overall risk to the grower by producing goods for several
different markets (Nguyen et al., 2014). Some growers and owners of
regrowth forests might also be able to diversify and reduce risks even
further by growing non-timber-forest-products such as rattans and food

Fig. 1. Examples of reforestation types, the usual ecosystem
goods and services targeted by them, and the socio-ecolo-
gical contexts in which they are mostly implemented in the
tropics. All images are from reforested areas in the Atlantic
Forest of South-eastern Brazil. Photo credits. Pedro H. S.
Brancalion.

P.H.S. Brancalion et al. Forest Policy and Economics 85 (2017) 103–113

106



