































































Using markets to leverage investment in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics


or medicinal plants alongside their timber, especially in early stages of
plantation growth when light availability is high (Vieira et al., 2009).

Many landowners growing trees for the first time may also have
trouble in maximizing the financial returns they are able to get from
their plantations (Lamb, 2010). Poor silviculture can result in sub-
stantial losses of potential value (Herbohn et al., 2014). For example, in
many smallholder plantations, thinning and pruning is minimal and
often is carried out in an ad hoc and opportunistic manner rather than
being based on silvicultural principles (e.g. see (Herbohn et al., 2014;
Nguyen et al., 2014). The economic consequences of poor silviculture
can be substantial. For instance, in the Philippines it has been estimated
that most smallholder woodlots produce merchantable volumes <
44% of their site potential, resulting in disillusionment of smallholders
(Le et al., 2012). In addition, smallholders may not understand the ways
that trees are valued (e.g. whether trees are sold simply by the number
of logs, the diameter or length of each log, by the log volume or as
partially sawn log flitches) or the effect of location on the log price they
are likely to receive (e.g. price at the stump, at the road side or at the
mill door) (see (Baynes et al., 2015a) for the factors that affect the value
of smallholder timber). Intermediaries can play an important role in
facilitating relationships between growers and markets (Box 1).

Market opportunities and the financial returns from tree-growing
are not the only factors affecting the attractiveness of this activity to
smallholders. They must also decide how much of their land to devote
to this new land use activity and how tree-growing might be linked with
their other land-use activities. This obviously depends on such things as
the financial return and opportunity costs of tree growing, but might
also be dependent on non-market factors such as local community at-
titudes and what their neighbors think: some landholders may be re-
luctant to begin tree growing if it has not been a traditional land use
activity in the past, irrespective of market realities (Pannell, 1999;
Lamb, 2010). In short, markets for forest products can often trigger
reforestation but may sometimes be insufficient. In such cases the fi-
nancial returns are seen as being too modest while the impediments and
risks remain significant. A good part of the problem is due to the fact
that many non-corporate landholders are unfamiliar with tree-growing
and with formal markets for forest products. This means governments
wishing to encourage plantation forestry may need to build technical
capacity amongst such landholders, provide financial incentives via
cheap loans and/or tax breaks, and also assist them to take advantage of
existing market opportunities or help them develop new ones.

3.2. Ecosystem services

3.2.1. Carbon sequestration
The sale of carbon offsets from FLR offers one of the clearest market

opportunities for ecosystem services (Newton et al., 2012). REDD+
schemes also now explicit support forest restoration as part of their
“enhancement of carbon stocks” modality. In fact, many of the well-
known FLR programs launched in the last years have paid specific at-
tention to the potential of FLR to mitigate global climate change by
sequestering carbon in forest and tree biomass, especially the New York
Declaration on Forests announced at the United Nations Climate
summit, which aims to halt deforestation and restore 150 million ha of
degraded landscapes and forestlands by 2020, and 350 million ha by
2035 (Suding et al., 2015). The intended Nationally Determined Con-
tributions (iNDCs), submitted by countries in advance of the 21st
Conference of the Parties on Climate Change also open a new window
of opportunity for leveraging carbon payments in the FLR context, since
governments will have to invest public funds or catalyze private in-
vestments in activities promoting climate change mitigation, including
reforestation. For instance, the Brazilian government set the reforesta-
tion commitment of 12 million ha as part of its iNDC, and a national
restoration plan has been developed to establish appropriate policy and
incentives to up-scale restoration (Brancalion et al., 2016). In spite of
clear potential for carbon markets to leverage investments in FLR,
payments for carbon credits are not yet available for most landowners.
Also carbon payments might be able to finance a larger share, or the
totality, of cheaper restoration projects based, for instance, on natural
regeneration.

Despite initial optimism, voluntary and “regulated” (usually called
“compliance”) carbon markets have not emerged at the speed and
magnitude initially expected (only US$200 million in 2012), and have
remained tiny compared to government support for REDD+ (over US
$7 billion in 2014) (Boucher, 2015). However, both carbon markets and
REDD+ have a limited economic potential to counter the main export
drivers of deforestation, estimated at US$134 billion (Rautner et al.,
2013; Boucher, 2015). Furthermore, benefits delivered by REDD+ to
participants are still modest, and in most reforestation programs,
especially when active restoration approaches are adopted, carbon
payments have not been enough to offset land opportunity costs and
expenses with reforestation implementation (Birch et al., 2010). This
financially unattractive scenario is evidence that, although climate
mitigation has been targeted as one of the main expected outcomes of
FLR programs, carbon payments may not be the main driver of these
programs. However, as discussed in the next section, carbon payments
may be bundled with other payments for ecosystem services, as well as
to projects planned for exploiting timber and non-timber forest pro-
ducts, to make restoration more attractive to landowners; it might also
represent a welcome monetary contribution to restoration programs
that would be implemented anyway, independently of receiving
funding from the carbon market. One important element that will

Box 1
The role of intermediaries in linking landholders and markets for forest products.

Intermediaries or ‘middlemen’ can sometimes provide a valuable service linking growers with markets. These are usually independent en-
trepreneurs who sense an opportunity to service the needs of local growers and industry. They are likely to be especially valuable when:

⁎ Many tree-growers have only small plantations that generate small volumes of marketable logs at infrequent intervals.
⁎ Plantations are scattered over large areas and growers lack the means of taking their products to markets.
⁎ There are complicated bureaucratic impediments that must be overcome when marketing goods (e.g. harvest permits, transport licenses,
local and regional taxes and road fees, etc.).

⁎ Market knowledge is limited and growers do not know how to obtain/negotiate the best price for their goods.

Under these circumstances, intermediaries can locate and assemble commercially attractive volumes of logs and deal with the bureaucratic
necessities concerning their sale. An example of the complexities of marketing is given by Le et al. (2004) who describe the challenges faced by
small-scale producers of forest products in Vietnam and the role of intermediaries in some local market chains. But such intermediaries can also
be predatory. This can happen when markets are not transparent and when collusion between buyers takes place. Governments have a role in
regulating the role of intermediaries.

P.H.S. Brancalion et al. Forest Policy and Economics 85 (2017) 103–113

108



