































































Using markets to leverage investment in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics


determine the impact that carbon funding might have for FLR is the
timing of the payments: schemes that manage to anticipate payments
based on planned or early stage restoration results will have a much
bigger impact than those where payments are made over time in par-
allel to carbon sequestration, as most restoration costs occur in the first
few years.

3.2.2. Watershed protection
Watershed services are often a primary target of FLR programs in

developing countries (Huang et al., 2009; Brancalion et al., 2014;
Murcia et al., 2016). In contrast to carbon, payments for watershed
services are already part of the economy of most regions supplied by
piped water, in the form of water fees. In this case, government reg-
ulations have been the first step to allocate funds to pay for watershed
services provided by farmers, who have to adopt best land-use prac-
tices, including restoration of riparian buffers and other important
zones for hydrological functions (Richards et al., 2015). In most cases,
payments are not calculated based on the direct value of watershed
services, which is a methodologically complex issue. Rather, programs
have focused on compensating farmers for the opportunity costs of
changing land use (e.g. covering the revenues obtained by beef pro-
duction in riparian buffer where restoration interventions were estab-
lished) and for transaction and implementation costs (e.g. fencing,
plantation implementation, fire protection). Thus, farmers may not
profit beyond compensation payments from reforestation in this con-
text, a clear limitation for expanding FLR.

Leveraging investments in watershed services has been constrained
by several major barriers. One of these is that reforestation may need to
exceed a threshold area to generate the desired ecosystem service or to
offer the most optimal benefit/cost ratio (e.g., Holmes et al., 2004). To
maximize environmental services, this means that many landholders
will likely need to be involved and especially those in certain critical
landscape locations, such as steep hilly areas. Maximizing beneficial
outcomes will thus require complex planning and prioritization across
large spatial and temporal scales, while accounting for risks (Wilson
et al., 2011). Other barriers include: i) amounts received per area tend
to be very small relative to potential revenue from other sources
(timber, agriculture, cattle ranching); ii) high transaction costs of ad-
ministering payments of small amounts to many parties; iii) difficulties
in identifying who should be paid for the service and lack of formal
regulations to coordinate transactions; iv) monitoring issues, which
have to be addressed and protocols agreed upon as a basis for payments;
and v) ensuring that the type of reforestation used by all landholders
will be sufficient to generate the targeted ecosystem service. In spite of

these limitations, typical for new markets and economic activities,
ecosystem services have some potential to mobilize investments in
watershed FLR (Holmes et al., 2004; Wilson et al., 2011) especially if
nested with the production of forest products, as discussed in the next
section.

3.3. Bundling ecosystem goods and services

Payments for ecosystem services may provide an early and con-
tinuous cash flow stream with potential to offset land opportunity costs,
but the monetary values received tend to be low and are often not
enough to offset restoration costs and provide profits to farmers.
Therefore, there is an important economic synergy in exploring eco-
system services and forest goods in the same project, so bundling them
can be a viable solution to support reforestation (Brancalion et al.,
2012). This strategy can also help overcome the problems of high
transaction costs of payments for ecosystem services, especially if a
single payment is made for all of the services bundled together rather
than separate payments for carbon, water, soil protection etc. Another
promising approach is to bundle EGS supply with biodiversity con-
servation. Although a key principle of FLR is to help conserve biodi-
versity, most financing is expected to target restoration outcomes with
more immediate and direct benefits to people. For instance, the global
regions with higher potential to sequester atmospheric carbon are also
those with higher biodiversity levels (Strassburg et al., 2010). Con-
servation organizations could then take advantage of market opportu-
nities related to EGS to mobilize investments to implement FLR in
priority areas for biodiversity conservation (e.g. (Gilroy et al., 2014)),
and use the most appropriate forms of reforestation to achieve this goal.
Since FLR is a multi-purpose approach, bundling EGS makes more sense
than targeting each restoration outcome separately.

4. Market regulation for promoting restoration

Markets can be manipulated or regulated via a range of methods to
promote socially and ecologically balanced restoration. A portfolio of
these methods will likely create the optimal conditions for restoration,
while some of these methods have the added bonus of creating eco-
nomic environments that promote substantial private market invest-
ment (Fig. 2).

4.1. Economic mechanisms

These could include methods that reduce costs (or increase profits)
of restoration, via subsidies and price supports, subsidized finance
(loans), direct payments, or tax breaks, and those that increase costs (or
reduce profits) of damaging activities that compete with restoration,
such as pollution, water use or land taxes. An array of these methods
can be integrated to promote corporate investment and local-scale in-
volvement in restoration projects, and may be particularly effective
when coupled with PES schemes for carbon sequestration and wa-
tershed protection. Monitoring and penalization methods need to be in
place to prevent cheaters from exploiting incentives (e.g. accepting
payments for activities that they planned to do anyway) to ensure that
compensation is performance-related. In general, economic incentives
should be used to nudge private behavior towards optimum societal
outcomes, for instance by providing higher subsidies for activities with
greater positive socio-environmental externalities. This principle can be
applied even within the restoration sector, where ideally restoration
methods that provide greater societal benefits, or are located in areas
that lead to better outcomes for society, would receive higher in-
centives.

4.2. Technological, educational or infrastructural investment

Governments may be able to manipulate markets to alter the spatial

Fig. 2. Potential pitfalls and regulation opportunities of using markets for leveraging
investments in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics.

P.H.S. Brancalion et al. Forest Policy and Economics 85 (2017) 103–113

109



