































































Using markets to leverage investment in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics


pattern of agriculture by investing in improved agricultural outputs in
farmed regions with high yield potential but large yield gaps, via yield
enhancing technologies and education, or by improving transport net-
works (Laurance et al., 2014), especially if combined with economic
incentives. Under the land sparing argument, such yield improvements
combined with less post-harvest waste will allow demand to be met
from less land area, reducing profitability in marginal areas, typically
areas too steep or dry for modernized agriculture (Phalan et al., 2016).
In turn, this may create space for restoration via land abandonment in
marginal areas via rural to urban migration (Latawiec et al., 2015, but
see Rudel et al., 2009 who argue that improved yielding methods are
applied to greater land area). Land sparing-induced abandonment is
particularly likely when focusing on staple crops, in which demand is
inelastic to price changes, rather than luxury, export or biofuel crops
(Byerlee et al., 2014), when the promoted technology and methods are
labor or capital intensive (Angelsen, 2010), and when governments
couple improved yield with designated areas for conservation (Phalan
et al., 2016). Intensification of agribusiness (as well as conflict-induced
land abandonment in some areas) is likely encouraging the phase of
forest recovery across Latin America and the Caribbean, equating to
over 360,000 km2 of new woody vegetation between 2001 and 2010
(Aide et al., 2013). However, many marginal agricultural lands may not
spontaneously regenerate if maintained under use by extensive activ-
ities, such as cattle ranching, or if ecosystem resilience is low. FLR
projects thus have to provide some sort of financial benefit to encourage
natural regeneration or tree planting.

4.3. Legal and enforcement mechanisms

Introduction of new laws or enforcement of existing legal frame-
works that restrict access to some areas could result in passive refor-
estation or could encourage companies to engage in active restoration.
These will be particularly important in cases where existing economic
activity is causing ecological or socio-economic harm, such as defor-
estation for agriculture on steep slopes or abandoned land post mining.
Under the Brazilian Forest Code, for instance, landowners are required
to restore native ecosystems in pre-determined environmental condi-
tions (riparian buffers, steep slopes, mountain tops etc.) and to reach a
minimum percentage of the farm to be covered by these ecosystems
(Brancalion et al., 2016). Over 70 million farms, covering an area of
397 million ha (97.3% of private farms in Brazil) were already regis-
tered in an official system for supporting the compliance of this law,
suggesting that millions of farmers will soon be engaged in restoration
activities, and that restoration companies may find good market op-
portunities to profit.

4.4. Market-led standards and certification schemes

Voluntary schemes that provide access to lucrative markets and/or a
price premium, such as the Round Tables for Sustainable Palm Oil
(RSPO) and for Responsible Soy (RTRS) (Edwards and Laurance, 2012),
can include restoration as a key requirement for certification. Many
producers have tended to overlook legal stipulations to avoid planting
up to river edges, on particularly steep slopes, or above a threshold area
of land holding. Certified producers must restore forest if such condi-
tions prevail. With> 2.8 million ha of oil palm already certified
(~20% of total area), potential for market-based certification is suffi-
cient to promote large-scale forest restoration. The RSPO is working
hard to certify groups of small-holders and work with a landscape-level
approach to conservation planning (Edwards and Laurance, 2012),
which could also promote restoration.

5. Pitfalls of using markets

Although incorporating markets into the restoration process offers
big potential, we highlight five key unanswered questions and

associated dangers that require further research (Fig. 2).

5.1. Might restoration divert resources from protection of threatened
ecosystems and species?

Restoration has clear synergies with biodiversity conservation
(Possingham et al., 2015), which have enabled the inclusion of FLR
amongst the main global efforts to combat species loss (Janishevski
et al., 2015). Recognizing this, traditional conservation organizations
have broadened their scope to embrace restoration as part of their
mission, and used part of their budget to support restoration programs.
Since FLR provides more perceived socio-economic benefits and is
closer linked to economic development than conservation, funding can
eventually migrate from protecting threatened ecosystems and species
to restoring ecosystems with high importance for ecosystem services
provisioning and livelihoods, but potentially lower conservation out-
comes. This problem can be particularly observed in the case of un-
charismatic species or those without any economic use, and for species
and ecosystems that supply little or no ecosystem services to areas of
high human population density (“the night parrot effect” (Wilcove and
Ghazoul, 2015)). Conservation policies and organizations have then to
recognize that, in spite of the synergies, conservation and restoration
might compete for resources in some circumstances, and funding for
traditional conservation approaches have to be secured to safeguard the
protection of species and ecosystems poorly integrated into the FLR
agenda.

5.2. How successful are markets at determining the best type of restoration?

With specific legal or certification-related frameworks, markets are
guided to ecologically sound restoration decisions, such as the Brazilian
Forest Code and certification scheme requirement for natural forest
restoration along riverine edges. However, in the absence of specific
regulations, markets will likely make the most financially, but not ne-
cessarily ecologically, sound decisions, or be based on short-term rather
than long-term benefits/gains. In particular, decision-making by small-
scale local markets is likely to operate under a high discount rate,
placing a premium on short-rotation woodlots and rapid growing spe-
cies (e.g., eucalyptus) over longer-term and ecologically more valuable
restoration options. Here, a key aspect is to work with small-scale land-
owners to find rapidly growing native species and to enhance the di-
versity of restored lands. More generally, if market-driven restoration
takes too long to generate a particular ecosystem service, then this
could delay investment or even kill the market. Decisions about which
kind(s) of restoration is most appropriate entail significant investor and
market risk, which could manifest itself in investment peaks and
troughs mirroring market returns and shifting the locations and kinds of
restoration in which the market will invest. Understanding future de-
mand and the likely magnitude of market volatility for different re-
storation commodities over time are important research questions.
Another key question is how different restoration systems will differ in
the level of positive externalities generated for society, which should
inform economic incentive policies.

5.3. How successful are markets at influencing the location or spatial
prioritization of restoration?

The most important locations for restoration from biodiversity
conservation, watershed protection, and other ecosystem service per-
spectives will often not match those that seek to simply maximize
profitability from timber production or carbon sequestration and
stocking. To maximize profitability, market-based restoration is likely
to focus on marginal areas with lower opportunity costs, areas with
secure land tenure, locations lacking many small landholders who in-
crease transaction costs and/or locations with low transport costs to
market. Another issue is that although carbon-based conservation

P.H.S. Brancalion et al. Forest Policy and Economics 85 (2017) 103–113

110



