




































grain markets often represent the only option for resource poor 
farmers to acquire cash in situations where local credit markets 
are either missing or highly imperfect.

PMG membership
A key question is whether resource-poor and smallholder 
farmers benefit from PMGs. The results show that they 
do: membership increases with per capita livestock wealth 
but decreases with per capita farmland. It also appears that 
ownership of communication technologies reduces the 
probability of participating in collective marketing, perhaps 
indicating that farmers who lack alternative sources of market 
information may view PMGs as repositories of such information. 
However, households with less contact with extension 
services were also less likely to join PMGs, as were those with 
less contact with NGOs (common providers of agricultural 
extension). 

Governance of marketing groups
An important aspect of governance of PMGs are the rules 
defining the norms of operations, roles, and responsibilities of 
various organs and members. All the PMGs have written by-
laws governing the running of their groups. The by-laws put 
more emphasis more on the obligations of the members to the 
group but are relatively silent on the obligations of the group 
to members. For example, the by-laws require that members 
sell their grain through the PMG, make requisite payments and/
or contributions, prioritize farming of marketable crops, and 
contribute actively to the development of the group. Fair and 
transparent elections are not also consistently practiced, reducing 
the confidence of members in the group leadership. 

Performance of collective marketing groups 
Are groups with higher degree of collective action also more 
effective in providing marketing functions? Six indicators were 
identified for the levels of cooperation within PMGs: the number 
of elections since formation, share of members respecting 
bylaws, attendance of meetings, annual member contributions, 
cash capital, and annual subscription fees. An analysis of these 
indicators reveals that the level of collective action varies. Total 
assets built over time and total volume of grains traded provided 
indicators of marketing outcomes.  The aggregate performance 
rankings were correlated with higher levels of collective action.

Constraints to collective marketing
The three most important constraints to collective marketing 
were cited as lack of credit, price variability, and low volumes. 
Given the low level of market development and lack of service 
providers in many rural areas, PMGs are unlikely to prosper in a 
“business as usual” policy environment. Policies that spur PMG 
growth would include an enabling legal framework, improved 
access to market information, support to strengthen business 
skills, and access to essential finance and credit facilities. In Kenya, 
PMGs are registered as self-help groups (SHGs) but lack legal 
status as business enterprises, which restricts access to essential 
credit.	Lack	of	legal	standing	also	means	that	pmgs	can	neither	
be sued nor sue in case of any liability. This drastically diminishes 
the incentive for financial institutions to do business with PMGs. 

PMGs would benefit from a legal framework that facilitates their 
transition to cooperative societies and a policy framework that 
seeks to promote, guide, and discipline the operation of markets 
under the liberalized environment. This may include laws dealing 
with adoption of quality grades and standards, good agricultural 
practices, and environmental and consumer protection issues.

ConCLuSionS	And	poLiCy	impLiCAtionS

With imperfect markets and limited institutions to support market 
functions, liberalization strategies have failed to integrate smallholder 
farmers in less favored areas into the market system. This analysis has 
shown that PMGs were able to pay higher prices to members and 
improve opportunities for resource-poor farmers to benefit from 
markets. PMGs improved market opportunities by bulking, storage, 
grading, sorting, and selling the produce. The links to secondary and 
tertiary markets were enhanced through better coordination of 
production and marketing activities. The PMGs do not benefit only 
wealthier farmers. On the contrary, the incentive for joining seems 
to be higher for those with less farmland.

Nevertheless, only relatively successful PMGs were able to exploit 
this potential. The challenge is to mobilize farmers in participatory 
governance, provide start-up capital to PMGs, and provide training in 
business skills. In addition, PMGs need to be supported to transition 
into legal business entities to facilitate increased access to financial 
and other services from the formal sector. 

The effectiveness of the PMGs was hampered by their lack of cash 
capital to pay in time for produce deliveries. Cash-constrained 
farmers found it difficult to delay cash payments, even when future 
prices would be higher. The ability of the PMGs to access working 
capital through access to credit is therefore critical. One strategy 
would be to explore the use of crop inventory as collateral for 
financial credit. Another option would be to pay farmers a portion 
of the grain value at the time of delivery so that they can meet 
immediate needs while benefiting from better prices by delaying full 
payments. 

In addition, the establishment of a “union of PMGs” for expanding 
horizontal and vertical coordination of production and marketing 
activities may help address the problem of low volumes and price 
variability and make the groups economically attractive to financial 
institutions. The seasonal price differentials may also be exploited 
further through bulking and storage during periods of excess supply 
and selling when prices improve. These strategies should be pursued 
together with alternative options for smoothing supply through 
investments in drought mitigating and water harvesting techniques 
that would enable farmers in drought-prone areas manage 
production risk more effectively.

Bekele Shiferaw (b.shiferaw@cgiar.org) is a Senior Scientist, Resource and 
Development Economics, at the International Crops Research Institute for 
the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)

Gideon Obare (ga.obare@yahoo.com) is an Associate Professor, 
Department of Agricultural Economics, Egerton University and visiting 
scientist at ICRISAT

Geoffrey Muricho (g.muricho@cgiar.org) is a Research Associate at the 
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)



