




































INTRODUCTION

The Indian government accords high priority to integrated watershed management programs, 
especially in rain-fed and drought-prone areas. Investment 
in integrated watershed management requires cooperation 
among stakeholders at different levels. The ability of 
communities to initiate and sustain collective action often 
depends on internal socioeconomic characteristics and 
the biophysical and socioeconomic setting. There is a 
lack	of	knowledge	of	the	factors	that	influence	the	level	
and effectiveness of collective action within the context 
of community watershed programs. This study uses 
socioeconomic data from 87 watershed villages in six 
districts of Andhra Pradesh, India, to develop indicators 
for the degree of collective action and examine its 
potential determinants. The study provides useful insights 
on how community institutions determine the level of 
collective action in watershed management and how such 
collective action is related to the overall performance and 
effectiveness of watershed interventions. 

CoLLECtivE	ACtion	in	wAtERShEd	
MANAGEMENT

Some of the investment activities of watershed 
management include construction of check-dams for 
infiltrating surface water, terraces for soil and water 
conservation, and tree planting. Watershed management 
potentially provides livelihood support for socially complex 
and diverse groups with differing entitlements and rights 
of access and use of resources. Sustainable management 
of such resources requires institutional mechanisms for 
fostering cooperation and coordination of the resource 
use and investment decisions among diverse stakeholders. 

This study identifies two main components of collective 
action needed for the effectiveness of watershed 
management interventions. First are enabling institutions 
that enforce rules for operation and management of 
the various common assets and structures. These rules 
include	mechanisms	for	conflict	resolution,	regulation	of	
behavior, and agreed norms for sharing costs and benefits. 
Second is organizational performance - local mechanisms for 
coordination and implementation of watershed activities, 
including user groups, committees, and associations that 

determine the objectives and basic structure of authority 
and decision-making. The level of collective action 
therefore defines the ability of the community to create 
operational frameworks to achieve the goals pursued by 
the community.

mEthodoLogy	And	dAtA

Standard data collection instruments were used at the 
community level to collect information from leaders, 
user groups, and key informants in each of the 87 
watershed villages. Data included a range of issues that 
characterized the village and the watershed groups. This 
included multiple indicators for the level and success of 
collective action. The indicators span the types of group 
actions described above and are aggregated to develop 
indices of the level and effectiveness of collective 
action. Using these indices, the analysis investigates 
the determinants of the level of collective action and 
how	this	in	turn	influences	its	effectiveness	in	terms	of	
changes in natural resource conditions and livelihoods of 
resource users. Along with other factors hypothesized 
to	influence	the	success	of	collective	action,	the	
study analyzes how various facets of collective action 
determine outcomes such as improvement in soil and 
water conditions, and other natural resources on private 
and common lands. 

This first-stage effect of collective action is captured by 
constructing an aggregate performance index for diverse 
outcomes defining changes in resource conditions and 
benefits derived from watershed management activities. 
In the second stage, collective action in watershed 
management is expected to improve the wellbeing of 
the community and participants. This is the key incentive 
for stimulating greater participation and private and 
community investments in watershed activities. To measure 
this effect, information solicited from communities 
on various indicators of poverty and welfare changes 
within the watershed is used. These changes are those 
that respondents consider to be primarily attributable 
or driven by the integrated watershed management 
interventions. The study then tests whether the level of 
collective action in fact is associated with these positive 
welfare changes within the community. 

Without 

effective and 

adaptable local 

institutions, 

the long-term 

sustainability 

of watershed 

investments 

will remain 

questionable.

Community Watershed Management  
in Semi-Arid India:
The State of Collective Action and its Effects on  
natural	Resources	and	Rural	Livelihoods
bEkElE a. shifEraw, tEwodros a. kEbEdE, and v. ratna rEddy



