




































Level of collective action
Two sets of variables that capture the level of collective action 
in watershed management activities are considered. The index 
for enabling institutions includes rules adopted by the watershed 
community, percentage of watershed association members 
making cash and labor contributions, and attendance of meetings 
and fund-raising events. The organizational performance index 
includes proportion of smoothly running user groups, self-help 
groups, number of watershed association meetings per year, and 
percentage of members attending meetings.

Success of collective action
A mix of quantitative and qualitative indicators measures the 
effectiveness of collective action in watershed management 
in terms of achieving various community objectives, including 
number of improved or well-managed communal tube (drill) and 
open wells, check-dams, ponds, tanks, area of community forests, 
and share of communal and private land treated with collective 
conservation practices. In the second level of the analysis, seven 
indicators capture the changes in the level of asset endowments 
or poverty profiles in the surveyed communities, including 
increases in the number of households owning livestock and land, 
self-sufficiency in food staples, income growth, and reduction in 
seasonal and permanent outmigration.

RESuLtS

This study shows that collective action in watershed management 
can be captured through a set of variables that indicate the capacity 
of communities to design and enforce certain common institutional 
arrangements, and their ability to mobilize local financial and labor 
resources for watershed investments. The index for enabling 
institutions is positively associated with rainfall, number of castes, 
number of phones, and female employment in watershed works in 
the community, and decreases with larger groups and degraded land 
in the community, market access, and urbanization. 
The organizational performance index decreased with rainfall, size 
of the group, number of seasonal migrants, and distance from the 
seat of the local administration, but increased with area of the 
village,	flow	of	information	within	the	village,	share	of	land	under	
village commons, equitable distribution of benefits and preference 
given for employment of the rural poor and female workers. 
In most watershed communities the level of collective action is 
very limited: only 10%–15% of watershed communities were able 
to significantly harness the potential of collective action to achieve 
desired economic and environmental objectives. There is a strong 

correlation between higher levels of collective action and higher 
performance of communities in facilitating resource-improving 
investments, especially water-harvesting structures and good 
management of these resources. The effectiveness of watershed 
groups in terms of their performance on this index depended on 
other variables such as rainfall, access to education and other social 
services, governance structures, resource degradation or scarcity 
problems, and the quality of the road linking the village. On the 
other hand, the correlation between higher collective action and 
changes in the index of poverty parameters was not statistically 
significant. 

Changes in watershed natural resource stocks did not have a 
significant effect on changes in household welfare, indicating that 
the indirect effects of collective action on the poorest segments 
of the community are still limited. This offers evidence that 
the links between collective action and poverty are not always 
straightforward as distribution of rights and other factors will 
condition how effectively the poor may benefit from improved 
natural resource conditions within the watershed.

Overall, the results indicate that collective action has made a 
significant contribution in terms of improving the investment 
and management of critical jointly held natural resource assets, 
but evidence is still lacking on its effects on improving the asset 
endowments of the resource poor and reducing poverty levels 
within the semi-arid watershed villages included in this study.  To 
improve active participation of the resource users and the poverty 
impacts of watershed programs, there is a need to promote pro-
poor interventions and institutional arrangements that enhance 
equitable sharing of both costs and benefits. Future research 
needs to investigate how effective local institutions for watershed 
collective action emerge and how such institutions adapt during 
the	post-project	phase	and	influence	the	propensity	for	sustainable	
community management of local investments. Without effective and 
adaptable local institutions, the long-term sustainability of watershed 
investments will remain questionable.

Bekele Shiferaw (b.shiferaw@cgiar.org) is Principal Scientist and Regional 
Program Leader (Markets, Institutions and Policies) at the International 
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)

Tewodros Kebede (tewodros.kebede@fafo.no) is a Researcher at Fafo AIS 
Institute for Applied International Studies in Oslo, Norway

V. Ratna Reddy (vratnareddy@cess.ac.in) is a Senior Fellow and Professor 
at the Centre for Economic and Social Studies, Hyderabad, India



