




































INTRODUCTION

Despite increased awareness of the institutional founda-tions of development and natural resource management, 
development and conservation interventions continue to 
be carried out with an uncritical view of equity issues. The 
shortcomings lie not only with practitioners, but within re-
search as well. Research on the institutional dimensions of 
development and NRM continues to emphasize problems 
rather than solutions. This research tries to address these 
shortcomings by integrating institutional analysis (for prob-
lem identification and targeting of interventions) with institu-
tional interventions (for development of “good practice”). 

BACkgRound	And	mEthodoLogy

The research was conducted under the rubric of the African 
Highlands Initiative (AHI), an eco-regional program of the 
CGIAR, which aims to improve livelihoods and arrest natural 
resource degradation in the intensively cultivated highlands 
of eastern and central Africa. AHI works with interdisciplin-
ary teams of scientists and development partners to field 
test new approaches and synthesize results regionally. Unlike 
watershed management programs that focus primarily on soil 
and water conservation, AHI fosters an approach to integrate 
all components of the production system and landscape. This 
requires that tradeoffs and synergies between diverse goals 
be made explicit and managed. It also acknowledges that 
NRM is inherently political: decisions about which manage-
ment goals to foster lead to unequal benefits and often favor 
some groups at the expense of others.

This study reports on findings from the institutional research 
associated with integrated social, biophysical, and institutional 
interventions. The primary objective was to develop and 
document successful approaches for facilitating equitable col-
lective action processes and negotiated NRM solutions.

The research was conducted in four sites, two in Ethiopia 
and two in Uganda. All are highland micro-watersheds char-
acterized by smallholder farming systems, high population 
density, clear evidence of natural resource degradation, and 
their representativeness of larger highland areas within each 
country. These sites have each served for 5–10 years as 
benchmark sites for the AHI. Each site is home to one or 
more ethnic groups with a long history of occupation of the 
area and limited in-migration from other groups or areas. 

In each site, the research began with a situation analysis, 
using focus group discussions to identify local and external 
institutions and the participants, beneficiaries, and nature 
of benefits derived from each. Household interviews were 
then used to quantify levels and variation in household 

assets and participation or involvement with local and 
external institutions. Second, site and national stakeholder 
workshops were conducted to share findings and 
determine action research priorities. The workshops 
shared feedback from the situation analysis, identified 
and prioritized NRM issues requiring collective action 
and changes in institutional practice, and developed 
preliminary action plans for prioritized topics. Third, 
site teams conducted action research —both local and 
higher-level—to test strategies to support solutions 
to identified problems. The final step was to evaluate 
outcomes and impacts from the action research 
intervention through a participatory methodology.

FINDINGS

Local	communities	were	found	to	have	a	rich	array	of	
collective action institutions, which in turn provide a 
variety of economic and social support functions. While 
some of these were seen to support some groups more 
than others, most forms of collective action were found 
to play largely positive roles. However, practices of formal 
support agencies were found to be biased by wealth, gen-
der,	levels	of	political	influence,	and	other	factors,	exacer-
bating inequities over time. 

Local	forms	of	collective	action	seldom	emphasize	
common solutions to felt NRM problems, other than 
provision of inputs (labor, capital, land). Action research 
findings have illustrated the potential for improving liveli-
hoods and fostering more sustainable use of natural 
resources by catalyzing collective action on NRM where 
it is absent. Effective collective action seems to require 
use of both informal negotiation support processes and 
formal bylaw reforms and enforcement. Negotiated solu-
tions and bylaw reforms create stakeholder buy-in, which 
reduces ambiguity and makes people feel more account-
able to other parties when brought to account for their 
actions. A combination of formal and informal mecha-
nisms seems to be needed to revitalize natural resource 
governance and related livelihood and environmental ser-
vice outcomes. External agents (such as NGOs or local 
government) also have an important role to play, including 
information provision, community mobilization, facilitation, 
advocacy, monitoring, and negotiation support. 

Strategies to improve NRM at farm and landscape levels 
proved to be more effective when more equitable decision-
making processes were used that explicitly acknowledge di-
verse “stakes.” However, given the divergence of these stakes, 
bylaws also played a fundamental role in holding each party 
accountable to resolutions reached through negotiations. 

External 
development 
institutions 
often 
unintentionally 
increase existing 
inequities by 
working only 
with active 
community 
members 
and failing 
to establish 
mechanisms 
for equitable 
access to 
project benefits. 
Innovations 
to identify and 
overcome these 
biases are sorely 
needed.

Enabling Equitable Collective Action and Policy Change 
for Poverty Reduction and Improved Natural Resource 
Management in the Eastern African Highlands
laura gErMan, waga MazEngia, wilbErforcE tirwoMwE, shEnkut ayElE, JosEph tanui, siMon nyangas, lEulsEgEd 
bEgashaw, hailEMichaEl tayE, zEnEbE adMassu, MEsfin tsEgayE, francis alinyo, ashEnafi MEkonnEn, kassahun abErra, 
awadh chEMangEni, williaM chEptEgEi, tEssEMa tolEra, zEwdiE JottE, and kiflu bEdanE



