




































Adapting bylaws to local conditions and stakeholder priorities also 
induced marked livelihood improvements by enabling collective action 
and technology adoption. However, participatory bylaw negotiations 
did not reduce the need for bylaw enforcement. Rather, participation 
made offenders feel more responsible to agreements once accused, 
increasing the effectiveness of informal efforts to increase compliance.   

impLiCAtionS	foR	pRACtitionERS

•	 Collective	action	serves	critical	development	and	social	support	
functions in local communities. External institutions should seek to 
build upon local institutions that contribute most to livelihood goals, 
in particular for women and poorer households. Part of this effort 
should be oriented toward linking technology dissemination with 
low-risk forms of credit and diversification of assets of the poor.

•	 External	development	institutions	often	unintentionally	increase	
existing inequities by working only with active community members 
and failing to establish mechanisms for equitable access to project 
benefits. Innovations to identify and overcome these biases and 
socially-disaggregated monitoring of interventions are sorely needed.

•	 Local	forms	of	collective	action	emphasize	enhancing	buying	power	
and “safety net” functions, leaving many common NRM problems 
unaddressed. External support for “horizontal” negotiations among 
local resource users is needed to support collective solutions to 
NRM problems that remain unaddressed despite their negative 
livelihood consequences.

•	 Extension	and	development	organizations	must	consider	the	politi-
cal dimensions of NRM. There are winners and losers from any 
given development intervention, and there are diverse interests 
and stakes on any given issue. Organizations must therefore learn 
to foster more equitable solutions to development and NRM chal-
lenges through stakeholder identification, negotiation support, and 
socially-disaggregated monitoring of interventions.

•	 ngos,	local	government,	and	other	development	actors	need	to	
get involved in natural resource policy formulation and implemen-
tation processes.  Their facilitation skills are important for fostering 
more equitable and participatory natural resource governance 
processes since there are close links between negotiation support, 
technological innovation, and rules and regulations on NRM.

•	 fostering	collective	action	to	address	felt	community	needs	re-
quires informal negotiation support, formal bylaw reforms, and 
forms of enforcement adapted to local social realities. Participa-
tory bylaw reforms create stakeholder buy-in, which reduces the 
cost of enforcement and reduces ambiguity. Neither formal nor 
informal mechanisms would be fully effective without the other.

•	 the	external	agent,	whether	an	ngo,	community-based	organiza-
tion, or local government, can help bear the transaction costs of 
organizing collective action by providing information and mobilizing 
communities.  Since rules restrict certain land use behaviors seen 
to harm other stakeholders, technological alternatives can also 
help landowners to bear the livelihood costs of good governance. 

poLiCy	impLiCAtionS

•	 policymakers	must	seek	ways	to	build	upon	the	strengths	of	local	
institutions and the crucial social support functions they provide, 
in particular for women, the poor, and other marginalized groups. 
They must also seek ways to facilitate the participation of poorer 
households by assisting them in bridging the assets gap that hin-
ders their ability to invest.

•	 many	national	natural	resource	policies	exist,	although	many	are	
not followed. Participatory bylaw reforms suggest an interest in 
improved natural resource governance among local residents. 
More attention should be paid to building the “soft skills” and 

processes required to create community buy-in to good gover-
nance, and to enforcement mechanisms that are effective, while 
providing alternatives (technologies, cost sharing among stake-
holders) where policies restrict livelihoods options.

•	 the	partitioning	of	mandates	between	research,	extension,	and	
law enforcement agencies causes these issues to be treated sepa-
rately and important synergies to be lost. Mechanisms and incen-
tives for institutional cooperation toward more equitable and 
negotiated solutions to NRM are needed to harvest the potential 
of technology-governance synergies. 

•	 Local	residents	can	formulate	nRm	bylaws	that	address	their	
own felt needs, but bylaw enforcement by communities them-
selves is more of a challenge. Communities want local govern-
ment to play a role in the enforcement of bylaws. This should be 
taken into account in the process of local government reforms 
in the region so that participatory governance processes can be 
institutionalized in the region.

•	 Empirical	research	on	the	institutional	aspects	of	development	has	
advanced understanding of the pitfalls of development practice 
and the characteristics of local institutions.  Two fundamental gaps 
remain. The first is ensuring widespread access to lessons learned 
among development practitioners to improve their practice. The 
second is the need to move beyond the identification of problems 
to the identification of viable solutions (“good practice”) through 
the coupling of empirical and action-oriented research.

Laura German (l.german@cgiar.org) is a scientist of the Forests and Governance 
Programme of the Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) and a re-
search associate of the African Highlands Initiative (AHÍ)

Waga Mazengia (waga966@yahoo.com) is a researcher in Agronomy in the South-
ern Agricultural Research Institute in Ethiopia

Wilberforce Tirwomwe (wtirwomwe@yahoo.com) is a community development 
worker with Africa 2000 Network, Uganda

Shenkut Ayele (shenkutayele@yahoo.com) is a researcher in agricultural extension 
of Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research

Joseph Tanui (j.tanui@cgiar.org) is a regional research fellow in the African High-
lands Initiative (AHI)

Simon Nyangas (nyangassimon@yahoo.co.uk) is an extension officer in Kapchorwa 
district, Eastern Uganda and the organizing secretary of Kapchorwa District  Land-
care Chapter (KADLACC), Uganda

Leulseged Begashaw (lbegashaw2005@yahoo.com) is a researcher in Plant Pathol-
ogy in the Southern Agricultural Research Institute in Ethiopia

Hailemichael Taye (hailat2003@yahoo.com) is a development evaluation specialist 
with an international development consultancy firm in Ethiopia. 

Zenebe Admassu (zenebeteferi@yahoo.com) is a researcher in soil and water con-
servation of Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research 

Mesfin Tsegaye (mesfin_tsgy@yahoo.com) is a Junior Researcher in Soil and Water 
Research Division of Holleta Agricultural Research Center of the Ethiopian Institute 
of Agricultural Research.

Francis Alinyo is a member of Uganda National Landcare secretariat and a re-
search student at Newcastle University in Australia

Ashenafi Mekonnen is a resercher in Agricultural Extension in the Southern Agricul-
tural Research Institute in Ethiopia

Kassahun Aberra (waga966@yahoo.com) is a Technical Assistant in Southern Agri-
cultural Research Institute in Ethiopia

Awadh Chemangei is a district natural resource management officer and chairper-
son of Kapchorwa District Landcare Chapter ( KADLACC), Uganda

William Cheptegei is an agroforester and treasurer of Kapchorwa District Landcare 
Chapter (KADLACC), Uganda

Tessema Tolera is an independent consultant working out of Addis Ababa

Zewude Jote (zewdieqpo@yahoo.co.uk) is a sociologist and an independent consul-
tant in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 

Kiflu Bedane (kiflu-b@yahoo.com) is an independent researcher formerly with the 
Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research 



