




































BACKGROUND

Traditional communal landholding has long been prevalent in the Afar region of Ethiopia, 
accommodating the interests of different user groups 
for many generations. This form of landownership, which 
entails use of pastoral resources scattered over a wide 
area to produce livestock, is attributable to ecological 
conditions characterized by frequent drought. The harsh 
environment in which herders raise their livestock requires 
constant mobility to regulate resource utilization via a 
common property regime. In contrast to the mobile way 
of life characterizing pastoralism, agriculture as a sedentary 
activity is only marginally present in the lowlands of the 
Afar region. However, the traditional land use system is 
changing because of pressures from both governmental 
policy and natural events such as drought. 

This study gathered data from 180 selected pastoral 
households in six sites in the Afar region of Ethiopia in 
2004–06. In addition to household surveys, secondary 
and detailed qualitative data were collected though 
group and key-informant interviews; evidence was 
further strengthened by reviewing secondary sources 
and conducting expert interviews. Analysis shows that 
the question of whether the recent option of small-
scale farming is taken up by pastoralists depends on 
factors such as suitability of the area for agriculture, per 
capita livestock holding of a household, access to wage 
employment, and external support. Overall, the study 
indicates that communal land ownership, which forms 
the basis for pastoralism, is under pressure as a result 
of state intervention and natural challenges, confirming 
results of other studies of pastoral areas.

CoERCivE	And	non-CoERCivE	pRopERty	
RIGHTS CHANGES IN THE AFAR REGION

State intervention in the Afar region, mainly since the early 
1960s, has produced detrimental effects on pastoralist 
livelihoods. First, the state expropriated large areas of 
dry-season rangeland, exacerbating feed scarcity in the 
area. Second, the state enforced the transformation of 
pastoralism into sedentary farming without taking into 
account pastoral households’ capacities to produce 
crops. Development schemes initiated and financed by 
the state couldn’t enhance the capabilities of pastoral 
households to derive the full benefits of their land. Devoid 
of public participation in their formulation, these schemes 
paradoxically fostered dependency among pastoralists, 
which remained even after the schemes ended. Third, state 
intervention created a window of opportunity for some 

pastoralists, while others, such as women and the poor, 
were deprived of the benefits of the new arrangements.

But Afar pastoralists are threatened not only by the 
coercive actions of the state, but also by natural challenges 
such as recurrent drought. Two major droughts have hit 
the area since the mid-1990s, and short dry spells are 
common. This has had two major consequences. First, the 
prevalence of drought has reduced total livestock assets 
and productive capacities of the area. And second, it has 
recalibrated the terms of trade against the pastoralists. 
(Assessment reports of aid agencies indicate a sharp 
decline of livestock prices during the droughts.) Faced 
with such natural challenges, pastoral households employ 
coping strategies which may involve different ways 
of using the available resources, even looking beyond 
pastoralism. On the one hand, this natural challenge 
triggered the intervention of external actors to facilitate 
cooperation among pastoralists, providing a catalyst for 
them to take up farming. On the other hand, it increased 
the pastoralists’ expectations that they would benefit 
more by taking advantage of the external assistance and 
participating in collective efforts. These expectations, 
realized or not, have produced cooperative decisions 
toward engaging in organized activities such as farming.

DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

With regard to the present study, two points are worthy 
of policy attention.

1. Averting state coercion: The coercive expropriation of 
pastoral land has slowed since 1991, and Afar pastoralists 
have regained some of their lost rights over their 
traditional land. However, the current national policies 
are not immune from the anti-pastoral sentiment. The 
2005 national land use proclamation declares that 
communal rural land holdings may be converted to 
private holdings if the government finds it necessary. 
There is also a plan to expand irrigated land in the Awash 
basin. Implementation of such a plan would require 
evicting pastoralists. Current experiences in non-pastoral 
areas show that undervaluation of land, large variance 
between what investors pay and what evictees receive, 
and failure of evictees to start new livelihoods are critical 
problems associated with the expansion of investments in 
rural areas of Ethiopia. These problems are attributable to 
a lack of effective institutions and appropriate governance 
structures, including lack of clear guidelines on land 
valuation, marginalization of landholders in the process 
of land transfers, and a weak organizational setup to 
administer the transformation process.

The 

relatively low 

participation 

level of better-

off pastoralists 

in collective 

action to 

start farming 

implies 

that crop 

production 

is not a 

substitute for, 

but is rather 

subsidiary 

to, livestock 

production in 

dry areas. 

The Transformation of the Commons:
Coercive and Non-Coercive Ways
bEkElE hundiE and Martina padManabhan



