




































2. Harmonizing policy emphasis with the potentials of pastoral areas: 
The transformation of property rights due to natural challenges has 
had important implications for the livelihoods of pastoralists. Poor 
households (in terms of livestock assets) are more interested in 
farming compared to better-off ones. Decisions of pastoralists toward 
farming	could	reflect	their	reactions	toward	recurring	natural	hazards:	
farming is thought to be a post-shock livelihood by households that 
cannot call upon their pastoral assets post-drought. 

Despite this fact, two points can be made about the potential of 
farming in the study areas in general. First, livestock appear to be 
somewhat more tolerant of drought conditions than crops, since they 
are mobile. The existence of mobile pastoralism in dry regions of 
the world also implies the relative viability of livestock production as 
compared to rain-fed agriculture in these regions. Efforts to produce 
food crops under rain-fed conditions may not provide any substantial 
remedy to the decline of food security when drought occurs; during 
a prolonged spell it presumably will not. Second, although crops can 
be produced using irrigation in some ecological niches, an irrigation-
based production system is less appealing in many parts of Afar given 
the scarcity of water. Consequently, livestock production appears to 
be the best, and in some areas the only, option under the existing 
technologies. 

ConCLuSion

The relatively low participation level of better-off pastoralists in 
collective action to start farming implies that crop production is not 
a substitute for, but is rather subsidiary to, livestock production in 
such dry areas. Therefore, instead of overrating the sustainability and 
impact of farming on poverty reduction, it would be worthwhile to 
focus on livestock production. In this regard, improving key services, 
such as the livestock-market information system, veterinary and 
financial services; investing in infrastructure; and enhancing feed 
management are key to turning the silent transformation of the 
commons into a viable development path for the Afar. Moreover, 
other alternative income sources should be promoted in addition to 
farming as a means of improving the capacity of (poor) pastoralists 
to overcome potential livelihood challenges.

Bekele Hundie (bekelehu@yahoo.com) is an assistant professor in the 
Department of Development Economics of the Ethiopian Civil Service 
College

Martina Padmanabhan (Martina.padmanabhan@agrar.hu-berlin.de) is 
a research fellow at the Division of Resource Economics at the Faculty of 
Agricultural and Horticulture of the Humboldt-University of Berlin



