




































BACKGROUND

In Ethiopia, much debate and policy advice on agro-pastoralism and pastoralism is based on stereotypical 
representations of pastoralist areas, the notion among 
the ruling elite that pastoralism is outdated, and technical 
interventions that promote sedentarization. A farming 
highland and pastoralist lowland dichotomy tends to 
prevail in public discourse. The resulting bias in land tenure 
policies largely ignores the specificities of the pastoralist 
lowlands and considers sedentarization as the precondition 
of progress. Typically, the state aids the expansion of 
agriculture into the lowlands, but fails to regulate the 
tenure transformations that accompany the diversification 
of rural resource use. Consequently, property rights are 
undergoing significant transformation along with economic 
changes, and land tenure relations are shifting from 
communal and collective use to enclosed and individual 
use, to the detriment of the poor. 

pAStoRALiSm,	pRopERty	RightS,		And	
CoLLECtivE	ACtion

This case study investigates practices of collective action 
in water resource management of the (agro-) pastoralist 
commons in eastern Ethiopia with an emphasis on the 
following questions: 

•	 what	types	of	collective	action	prevail?

•	 how	do	changes	in	property	rights	affect	incentives	for	
collective action?

•	 what	are	the	distributional	consequences	in	the	welfare	
of pastoralist households? 

The literature on collective action identifies a number 
of factors that induce cooperative behavior in natural 
resource management: asset ownership, homogeneity of 
group members, mutual vulnerability of group members, 
and dependence on the resources. In addition, institutional 
arrangements (penalty systems and rule enforcement) can 
induce cooperative behavior.

Study	SitES	And	mEthodoLogy

This study focused on three districts in eastern Ethiopia 
that represent different (agro-) pastoralist household 
economies and political settings. Data collection employed 
focus group discussions using rapid rural appraisal 
techniques, a detailed household survey, and key informant 
interviews with experts on institutions related to resource 
governance. A qualitative in-depth analysis of the data 
looked into the specific factors that affect the rules 
governing collective action and property rights and the 
distributional effects of the institutional arrangements. 

findingS	on	CoLLECtivE	ACtion	in	
WATER MANAGEMENT

Wells
Access rights are usually based on a household’s 
contribution of labor to the digging and maintenance 
of wells. Non-contribution leads, in theory, to 
restrictions on access. Rights are also usually granted 
in expectation of future reciprocity; this is important 
because differentiated rainfall patterns can bring 
water scarcity to one location but not necessarily to 
another in the region. Where water tables are deep 
and well construction requires high labor inputs, 
access to water is usually restricted for non-members.  
Reciprocal sharing is more common where initial 
investment costs are low.

In times of drought crises, pastoralist households seek 
grazing resources and well water based on kinship 
relations.	however,	when	an	influx	of	non-members	
with kin relations becomes common, it reduces 
incentives for members to contribute to maintenance. 
Collective herding increases the pressure on water 
wells as noncontributing households water their own 
livestock with the larger pool of animals.

Because it is almost impossible to exclude non-
members from using well water, especially during 
crises, incentives for members to contribute to well 
management decline the more often crisis situations 
prevail. 

Cisterns
There are marked differences in the case of private 
and communal cisterns. Owners of private cisterns 
use them to generate revenue: users have to pay. 
In communal cisterns, those who contribute labor 
gain access, and revenue generated from water sales 
to non-members is shared among members. The 
proliferation of private cisterns in the 1980s and 1990s 
brought water prices down and reduced incentives 
to maintain communal cisterns and wells. However, 
with the gradual decline of communal water points and 
restrictions on construction of new cisterns, private 
owners were able to increase prices, and water became 
unaffordable or unavailable during droughts.

Because de facto 
privatization 
provides some 
individuals with 
secure access 
to resources 
and additional 
income but 
excludes others, 
collective action 
on a local scale 
is insufficient 
to counter the 
unmaking of 
the commons. 
It needs to be 
complemented 
by a land 
tenure policy 
that ensures 
the rights of 
communal 
users.

Unmaking the Commons:  
Collective Action, Property Rights and Resource 
Appropriation in Somali Region, Ethiopia
fEkadu bEyEnE and bEnEdikt korf



