




































The move to construct private cisterns was a turning point 
in collective action for joint management of communal water 
resources. Wealthier clan members did not have incentives to 
contribute to the maintenance of communal water points. In 
effect, maintenance was relegated to politically or economically 
less powerful clan members. This transformation of intra-clan 
responsibilities and duties effectively changed the genealogical 
and social networks as well as the tight connections between 
rights and duties that were inherent in customary rules. 

Ponds
The construction of water ponds in the study area has been 
initiated by state-led development interventions. User groups 
provide labor during construction and for maintenance. Non-
contribution results in oral warnings and fines. However, 
enforcement is often lax due to social obligations and a 
reluctance to punish. In principle, all members who have 
contributed have the right to use water from communal 
ponds. Asset-poor households often rent oxen to ensure their 
contribution to pond construction. However, not all such 
households can afford the rental, may thus be unable to derive 
benefits from their water rights, and are thus effectively excluded 
from these entitlements.

muLtipLE	ARtifACtS,	muLtipLE	uSES,	 
muLtipLE	RuLES

The evidence shows that incentives for collective action in managing 
water systems depend on economic cost-benefit considerations 
and social norms. Exclusion of non-members is difficult to enforce, 
which reduces the incentives to contribute to collective action in 
maintaining those systems. Elite capture comes at the expense of the 
poor segments of the clan, which increases economic inequalities 
within clans.

The relationship of water and pasture resource use
In the agro-pastoral economy, access to water and pasture resources 
is intertwined. In principle, each clan possesses primary user rights 
over its own territory and is expected to confine herd movement 
within this territory under normal conditions. Asking permission to 
use another clan’s communal grazing and water resources is only 
considered appropriate when own-clan resources are inadequate 
due	to	drought,	violent	conflict,	or	subject	to	prior	inter-clan	
negotiation rituals.

The right to pasture is not necessarily linked with the right to water 
points, but generally they are granted in combination (excluding ac-
cess to water while granting access to pasture would make enforce-
ment costs prohibitive and likely create disputes at water points). 
This differentiates secondary users: those wealthy enough to buy 
water from private cistern owners can make use of the access rights 
whereas less wealthy households experience an entitlement failure.

Reciprocity and social obligation
Entrance to another clan’s territory generally requires prior 
negotiation, even though the hosting clan is socially inclined to 
grant access (the reciprocity principle). Inter-clan kinship relations 
are important in negotiating and differentiating access to grazing 
resources, for example if clan members have relatives within other 
clans with distinct territories. These lineages and networks across 
clans and sub-clans played an essential role in establishing reciprocity. 

The spread of private enclosures in some areas has complicated 
the system of granting access to grazing resources. Some clans have 
subdivided their territory and distributed the land to individual 
private	rights	holders,	or	influential	clan	members	have	constructed	
enclosure fences for cisterns or pasture. As a result, overall 
communal resources are continuously shrinking, complicating 
mobility patterns across seasons and years and restricting the 
options for coping with drought. 

ConCLuSionS

In eastern Ethiopia, property rights regimes to pastoral resources 
have undergone dynamic changes, and these changes affect incentives 
for and benefits from collective action to manage common property 
resources and the different technologies and artifacts that make 
benefit streams available from water and pasture use. These changes 
have further differentiated socioeconomic livelihoods and capabilities 
within agro-pastoralist society. The trend is toward privatizing and 
individualizing benefit streams to resources. Rights to those benefits 
are individualized, but duties to maintain commons resources are 
externalized. The impact of this on regulating access to the pastoral 
commons has disturbed reciprocal resource-sharing arrangements 
between clans, induced inter-clan disputes, and restricted mobility.

De facto privatization and individualization provide some clan 
members with secure access to resources and additional income, 
but potentially exclude others. While inter-clan negotiation may 
entail access to pasture commons, asset-poor households may fail 
to capture the associated benefit streams when water access is 
privatized and prohibitively priced. In that case, clan members may 
have endowments to some commons resources (like pasture), but 
will not enjoy the entitlement to actual benefit streams because of 
exclusion from others (like water). 

Customary mobility patterns as a strategy of risk coping are 
increasingly disturbed, and this increases the risk marginal pastoralist 
households experience in the face of climatic variability. While 
the effects of enclosure and privatization on socioeconomic 
differentiation are complex, overall they exclude poor households 
from access to resources essential for keeping livestock. 

poLiCy	impLiCAtionS

Past and present land tenure policies have tended to discriminate 
against the communal interests of pastoralist communities, and 
the federal government’s policy does not yet accommodate 
both customary modes of communal land use and emerging 
trends toward privatization. Collective action on a local scale is 
insufficient to counter the unmaking of the commons. It needs to 
be complemented by a land tenure policy that ensures the rights of 
communal users. Property rights to land and its multiple resources 
are central in defining incentives for collective action. Neither clans 
nor customary rule systems are adequate to fully adapt to changed 
environmental and social conditions. Nor has the state yet found 
a constructive role in the encounter with pastoralism and clan 
societies. A redefinition of this relationship is urgently needed.

Fekadu Beyene (keneefb@yahoo.de) is Assistant Professor at Haramaya 
University, Ethiopia

Benedikt Korf (korf@geo.uzh.ch) is Assistant Professor at the Department 
of Geography, University of Zurich, Switzerland



