




































INTRODUCTION

Property rights and collective action were severely undermined in Cambodia by the Khmer Rouge regime. 
After democratic consolidation, attempts to recreate a 
legal framework that secures access to land and natural 
resources were made by the Cambodian government 
and strongly supported by donors and civil society. 
Nevertheless, the new laws were only partly implemented, 
created new uncertainties among the rural poor, and 
benefited the more powerful.

This case-study identifies practices and policies that 
enhance the way collective action and property rights 
are used to build assets and income streams for the rural 
poor. To provide policymakers and others with a better 
understanding of property rights systems in place, the 
study assesses existing property rights systems in rural 
Cambodia to identify what benefit streams poor people 
can rely on. It also identifies forms and mechanisms of 
economic	and	social	cooperation,	how	they	influence	
property rights systems, and to what extent the rural poor 
are part of village networks. Based on this assessment, 
linkages between property rights, collective action, and 
poverty are analyzed.

thEoREtiCAL	fRAmEwoRk	

The conceptual framework guiding this case study builds 
on the Institutional Analysis and Development (IAD) 
framework. This framework separates context and action 
arenas. Context represents initial socioeconomic and 
political conditions shaping the opportunities of people 
for possible actions: the asset base, shocks and risks, and 
political structures. These factors affect property rights 
and collective action, which themselves form part of the 
initial context. The action arena is where individuals, the 
state, and other actors make use of institutions of property 
rights and collective action. Poor education, exclusion 
from social groups, and landlessness are among the many 
obstacles preventing people from engaging. 

While context focuses on initial conditions that affect 
people’s actions, their agency interactions with others 
shape their future. In their interaction processes, actors 
reinforce existing institutions or even create new ones. 
They can have direct effects on wellbeing or change 
institutions themselves. A number of feedback loops might 
occur before institutional changes affect the situation of 
the poor. However, improved social inclusion, income and 
health, and reduced vulnerability may serve as evaluative 
criteria to assess outcomes.

mEthodoLogy	

A mix of empirical research methods was employed. 
Interviews and group discussions with NGOs, donor 
agencies, and ministry staff identified research sites. Sites 
were selected with regard to different experience with 
formalized institutions for cooperation, natural resources 
endowment, and accessibility. Data collection included 
semi-structured interviews with key informants to 
gather information on village structure, a survey of 146 
households, group discussions, maps to identify changes 
in resources and to examine property rights of different 
user groups, and experimental games to assess trust 
levels. Secondary data analysis helped fill gaps the field 
research could not address.

RESuLtS

The findings indicate that the rural poor have access 
to natural resources that contribute a large share of 
their livelihoods, but accelerating resource degradation 
and conversion of natural resources into arable land 
leaves them with ever fewer options to derive income 
from these resources. Furthermore, slow land titling 
and demarcation in rural areas leave people vulnerable 
to land grabbing and exclusion from the benefits of 
common property. Findings also indicate that collective 
action still suffers from the Khmer Rouge legacy, which 
destroyed large parts of traditional social networks, 
including mutual help and religious institutions. Forced 
resettlement and collectivization also reduced people’s 
willingness to cooperate at a larger extent in agriculture.

The study shows that mutual help groups, religious 
activities, and small-scale associations are gaining ground. 
However, the poor lack confidence to take part in 
those associations and are sometimes unable to use 
the services offered. In addition, collective action to 
secure natural resources does not yet address ongoing 
resource degradation adequately. Formal, legally backed 
institutions lack local recognition and are unable to 
enforce rules set to protect the resources. Villages that 
manage their resources following traditional principles 
tend to cooperate better across village boundaries and 
are thus more successful in natural resource management. 
Nevertheless, they too are unable to protect them against 
outside	interventions.	Low	degrees	of	trust	also	contribute	
to low degrees of cooperation in natural resource 
management.   

For a country 
disrupted for 
decades by 
war, genocide, 
and forced 
collectivization, 
it is not 
surprising that 
neither property 
rights systems 
nor collective 
action yet fulfill 
the expectations 
of research 
institutions, 
civil society 
organizations, 
or donors.

Escaping Poverty Traps? Collective Action and 
Property Rights in Postwar Rural Cambodia 
annE wEingart and MichaEl kirk



