




































ConCLuSionS	And	poLiCy	impLiCAtionS

In rural Cambodia, natural resources such as local forests, fish 
ponds, lakes, water streams, or harvested fields are usually 
commonly owned and managed. This makes effective collective 
action a precondition for sustainable resource management as well 
as income generation for the rural poor. For a country disrupted 
for decades by war, genocide, and forced collectivization, and which 
is still characterized by fragile government institutions, it is not 
surprising that neither property rights systems nor collective action 
yet fulfill the expectations of research institutions, civil society 
organizations, or donors.

Under Cambodia’s devolution policies, important monitoring and 
enforcement mechanisms executed by weak local government 
authority are removed abruptly after responsibility is handed 
over	to	local	forest	or	fishery	community	organizations.	yet	these	
communities are neither officially acknowledged by the government 
nor able to execute all the responsibilities assigned to them. The 
institutional vacuum that emerges does not favor of the poor. 

For formal institutions to efficiently manage the local commons, the 
content, procedures, and sequencing to formulate and enforce laws 
and statutes integrating both guiding principles of a devolving state 
and traditional local rules, and enforcement mechanisms should be 
given more consideration. An important first step will be to reduce 
uncertainties about village or commune boundaries, and procedures 
to be taken in case of violation of rules. Enforcement will only work 
at the interface of established informal and newly developed formal 
institutions if administrative procedures are transparent and there is 
final recourse to the judiciary. 

For the rural poor, participation in organizations that foster 
collective action and govern the commons is costly: activities are 
time consuming, direct compensation cannot be expected, and 
unbalanced reciprocity often does not work. Although the poor 
profit most from protecting their local commons, they are not 

necessarily able to defend their interests effectively within village 
organizations.	they	remain	dependent	on	the	more	affluent	to	
initiate and continue cooperation. As the poor often have no formal 
education, a weak human capital base, and very little land, they are 
less likely to get involved in formalized groups, especially those that 
have been externally established to support agricultural activities.

The poor do participate in informal village groups and gatherings, 
though, and this is an entry point for further cooperation. However, 
empirical results show that they are more likely to comply with 
rules and mechanisms than to take deliberate action to shape and 
defend them. Complementary to this, the role of religious festivities 
and Buddhist values and norms needs further consideration. Jointly 
exercised religious activities provide an instrument to enhance 
cooperation in and between villages, and are explicitly used by 
political entrepreneurs and local leaders as a means to protect 
natural capital and to contribute to social cohesion and trust. 

Building on religious initiatives and the overall imperative of 
harmony, people start to communicate experiences where collective 
action had once been successful to protect their interests. They 
do not actively protest and demonstrate but formulate petitions 
and memorandums to raise awareness of their problems, address 
conflicts,	and	ask	for	external	support.	these	activities	should	be	
regarded as a starting point for collective action to protect property 
rights and to make use of a reformed property rights system that 
allows for new forms of collective action to combat poverty.

Anne Weingart (anneweingart@googlemail.com) is an economist at the 
Ministry of Economics, Brandenburg State, Potsdam, Germany

Michael Kirk (kirk@wiwi.uni-marburg) is a professor of development 
economics at the Institute of Cooperation in Developing Countries of 
Marburg University, Germany



