




































INTRODUCTION

This case-study presents a participatory action research (PAR) approach to analyzing decentralized forestry 
and natural resource management and land property rights 
issues, and catalyzing collective action among villages and 
district governments. The study focuses on understanding 
the current policies governing local people’s access to 
property rights and decision making processes, and 
learning how collective action among community groups 
and interaction among stakeholders can enhance local 
people’s rights over lands, resources, and policy processes 
for development. 

The authors applied PAR in two villages, one each in the 
Bungo and Tanjabbar districts of Jambi province (Sumatra) 
to facilitate identification of priorities through phases 
of	planning,	action,	monitoring,	and	reflection.	pAR	also	
helped participants decide what needed to be assessed, 
design further steps, and collect necessary information. 

CONTExT

Villages were selected based on their relatively strong 
kinship	ties,	medium	levels	of	conflict	between	villagers	
and outside actors, high poverty levels, and proximity to 
national parks and forestlands.  Villagers derived their 
incomes from small-scale rubber gardens, off-farm labor, 
timber and logging, and non-timber forest products. 
Production forest, protection forest, and national park are 
considered by the local community to be part of their 
traditional territory. 

Before 1998, management of natural resources, including 
forestry, was characterized by strong control by the 
central government. In 2001, a new law gave districts 
greater autonomy to formulate their own policies and 
exert control over resources. The policy was intended 
to improve local people’s management of and access 
to resources, but it was withdrawn in 2002 due to 
environmental degradation, failure to provide benefits to 
local people, and an uncertain business climate. In 2004, 
the government issued a law that clarified shared authority 
and re-instituted the hierarchy between central and 
district governments for dealing with various governance 
issues. However, struggles over power in the forestry 
sector continue.

dECEntRALizEd	foRESt	poLiCiES,	
pRopERty	RightS	And	CoLLECtivE	
ACTION

There were no marked differences between the two 
districts in how they responded to the government 
policies and how they dealt with property rights and 
collective action. Both shared concerns over growing 
needs for more lands for development and clarifying 
property rights for local people, encouraging them 
to propose forestlands conversions to the ministry. 
However, NGOs and others have contributed to 
shaping local policies. For example, in one village, such 
interaction has contributed to internalizing principles of 
transparency, openness, and participation. 

Local	forest	people	expressed	a	strong	need	to	
secure their traditional farmlands and rubber gardens, 
whether	outside	or	inside	forestlands.	Lands	outside	
can be readily secured, but people may need to pay 
and wait for some time before obtaining such rights, 
and only a few go through this process. The central 
government has delegated to district offices affairs 
related to management and administration of lands 
outside forestlands and to educating people about the 
importance of legal security over lands. Efforts to secure 
lands for local people, whether within or outside state-
claimed forestlands, face a complicated procedure. 

Local	land	tenure	insecurity	is	due	to	governmental	
frameworks that ignore the needs of forest-dependent 
people. Some regulations and ministerial decrees, for 
example, favor large-scale investment. Some national-
level regulations gave local groups or cooperatives the 
right to manage or use limited amounts of forest, but 
their implementation has been problematic. 

The government is currently embarking on new policies 
to promote property rights for local communities and 
the poor. While the programs offer opportunities for 
communities to engage in collective action and improve 
their wellbeing, questions remain as to whether their 
implementation will truly secure property rights and 
promote genuine collective action or benefit poor 
communities.

Action 

research may 

be an effective 

strategy for 

fostering 

collective 

action and 

maintaining 

the learning 

process that 

leads groups 

to be more 

organized 

and cohesive, 

and district 

government 

officials to be 

more receptive 

to stakeholders.

The Role of Collective Action in 
Securing Property Rights for the Poor: 
A Case Study in Jambi Province, Indonesia
hEru koMarudin, yuliana l. siagian, and carol J. piErcE colfEr 
(with nEldysavrino, yEntirizal, syaMsuddin, and dEddy irawan)



