




































fACtoRS	StREngthEning	CoLLECtivE	ACtion	

Trust and clearly delineated authority lead to effective collaboration 
among groups managing natural resources. In this study, trust 
developed through the creation of a mechanism wherein people 
could share their concerns openly and regularly. This led to 
improved understanding of local problems and willingness to work 
toward resolving land-use planning issues. Government officials 
also became more likely to abide by laws when a clear division of 
authority was laid out in the legislation. However, centrally designed 
legislation was only effective when developed and agreed upon by 
the various levels together.

fACtoRS	AffECting	CoLLECtivE	ACtion	
WITHIN GROUPS

Most participants agreed that individual group members have strong 
motivation to work collectively. Women’s groups emphasized trust 
as an important factor in deciding to join a group. They considered 
trust and honesty crucial for a group to be strong and to reach 
common goals, build effective leadership, and sustain group cohesion. 
A sense of trust within groups made members more optimistic 
about reaching common goals. 

CoLLECtivE	ACtion	to	Avoid	ELitE	CAptuRE	

At higher levels of governance, some agencies applied pressure to 
assure prioritization of their programs and district development 
plans, resulting in fewer chances for funds to be allocated to needier 
parties. For example, one village head whose role should have been 
to mediate between the parties asked a group of farmers to pay 
a fee to him for the sale of their lands to a palm oil company. The 
group members united, stuck to their commitment not to sell land 
individually, and refused to pay the fee to the village head. They also 
used various means to overcome the village head’s inappropriate 
behaviors, for example, by sending complaints to the subdistrict. By 
building relations with outsiders, making the misconduct obvious, 
and thereby forcing concerned elites to stop their actions, the group 
avoided elite capture.

CoLLECtivE	ACtion	to	pRESERvE	 
pRopERty	RightS

At the district level, the authors worked with officials to clarify 
areas of expertise and resource management options, and to 
improve both transparency and accountability. However, actual 
policy changes were modest—primarily increased willingness 
to work with district partners to resolve outstanding issues of 
forestland reallocation. Efforts to strengthen civil society as a 
means to contribute to policy formulation and more seriously 
monitor government have also been important for identifying and 
strengthening mechanisms for accountability. Facilitated community 
groups have shown the capacity to participate in decisionmaking for 
development, build alliances and networks, and reduce elite capture. 
However, it is also necessary to network with more powerful 
stakeholders to accomplish goals like more equitable access to land, 
preventing elite capture, increasing incomes, and improving women’s 
status.

ConCLuSionS,	poLiCy	impLiCAtionS,	And	
RECOMMENDATIONS

This study concludes that action research may be an effective 
strategy for fostering collective action and maintaining the learning 
process that leads groups to be more organized and cohesive, and 
district government officials to be more receptive to stakeholders. 

poLiCy	impLiCAtionS

•	 it	is	possible	to	catalyze	collective	action	and	strengthen	local	
self-confidence and capabilities to interact with more powerful 
outsiders, negotiate effectively, and bring pressure to reduce elite 
capture of local benefits.

•	 the	differences	within	and	between	communities	are	vast,	and	
participatory action research within comparatively homogenous 
groups is one way to accommodate this diversity in local 
planning. By focusing on what communities can and want to do, 
a climate of confidence is built that can contribute to successful 
development and conservation outcomes.

•	 participatory	action	research	with	government	officials	can	build	
their willingness to listen to a wider variety of stakeholders and 
increase their respect for local community input and willingness 
and ability to manage adaptively and equitably.

poLiCy	RECommEndAtionS

•	 when	implementing	development	programs,	work	with	strongly	
motivated and already existing community groups, wherever 
possible. Provide local groups with access to networks of 
information and institutions.

•	 invest	more	to	support	monitoring	and	supervision	activities,	and	
promote transparent and participatory forums for deliberations.

•	 Build	capacity	of	local	groups	to	grasp	opportunities	for	
improving livelihoods and informing development planning; enable 
them to increase their knowledge and skills in group organization 
and financial and resource management.

•	 Enhance	coordination	and	shared	learning	among	government	
units; apply transparent and participatory processes; and use a 
case-by-case approach to address land-use planning and forest 
reallocation issues.

Heru Komarudin (h.komarudin@cgiar.org) is a Research Officer at the 
Forests and Governance Programme, Center for International Forestry 
Research (CIFOR)

Yuliana L. Siagian (y.siagian@cgiar.org) is a Research Assistant at the 
Forests and Governance Programme, Center for International Forestry 
Research (CIFOR) 

Carol J. Pierce Colfer (c.colfer@cgiar.org) is a Principal Scientist 
(anthropologist) in the Forests and Governance Program at the Center for 
International Forestry Research (CIFOR)



