




































The Role of Collective Action and 
Property Rights in Poverty Reduction
EsthEr Mwangi, hElEn MarkElova, and ruth MEinzEn-dick

Poverty reduction is at the forefront of global discussions, with various parties urgently pushing for 
policies and programs to enhance the well-being of the 
world’s one billion poor. But a better understanding of 
the manifestations of poverty and the factors affecting it 
is required in order to inform these global policy efforts. 

The United Nations Office of the High Commission for 
Human Rights defines poverty as “a human condition 
characterized by the sustained or chronic deprivation of 
the resources, capabilities, choices, security and power 
necessary for the enjoyment of an adequate standard 
of living and other civil, cultural, economic, political and 
social rights.” Property rights are part and parcel of 
economic rights and entitlements, and collective action 
enhances people’s choices, capabilities, and power. But 
many rural poor do not have secure property rights and 
cannot participate in collective action due to resource 
and time constraints. Therefore, strengthening the 
institutions of property rights and collective action is an 
essential part of improving the livelihoods of vulnerable 
and marginalized rural groups, including women.

Secure property rights are a key poverty-reducing 
mechanism because they provide the rural poor 
not only with present-day income streams, but also 
with incentives to invest in productive technologies 
and sustainable management of resources in the 
future. However, many government programs have 
been implemented without an understanding of the 
complexity of property rights and have actually reduced 
tenure security for poor and marginalized groups 
by allowing elite capture of property, for example. A 
better understanding of how the poor can protect and 
expand their access to and control over resources can 
significantly improve poverty-reduction efforts. 
 
There is also a growing recognition of the important role 
of collective action in  poverty reduction. Through formal 
and informal groups, smallholders can work together to 
overcome limitations of wealth, farm size, and bargaining 
power. Collective action is also needed to adopt 
many technologies and natural resource management 
practices that operate at the landscape level. In addition, 
collective action can contribute to poverty reduction 
through mutual insurance, sustainable management of 
natural resources, increased opportunities for income 
generation, and improved provision and access to 
public services. As with property rights, vulnerable and 
marginalized groups are often at a disadvantage when 
it comes to collective action, either because of social 

exclusion, lack of time to participate in meetings and 
activities, lack of education and confidence to speak in 
meetings, and domination by local elites. 

To examine the role of the institutions of collective 
action and property rights on poverty reduction, 
the Systemwide Program on Collective Action and 
Property Rights (CAPRi) of the Consultative Group 
on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) 
undertook a global research project with study sites 
in Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Indonesia, India, Cambodia, 
and the Philippines. The main goal of the project was to 
contribute to poverty-reduction efforts by identifying 
effective policies and practices that enhance the ways 
that collective action and property rights are used to 
build secure assets and income streams for and by the 
poor. The project intended to provide policymakers, 
NGOs, and community groups with knowledge of 
the factors that strengthen the rights of the poor to 
land and water resources and lead to more effective 
collective action by the poor. 

Four CGIAR centers and two German universities 
conducted empirical research on the role of collective 
action and property rights for disadvantaged groups. 
The briefs in this set represent the case studies that 
were part of the project. The case studies rely on a 
variety of research methods, including qualitative and 
quantitative approaches, participatory action research, 
and experimental games. They also cover a variety 
of contexts within Africa and Asia, which will allow 
policymakers, researchers, and practitioners to further 
examine what constitutes poverty and affects the 
welfare of the poor between and within countries, and 
to draw comparisons. 
 
The project addressed a range of themes relevant 
to poverty-related policies and programs as well as 
collective action and property rights, such as

•	 risk	and	vulnerability	to	shocks,

•	 natural	resource	governance	and	access	to	resources,

•	 conflict	and	post-conflict	development,	and

•	 market	access	for	smallholders.
    

Strengthening 

the institutions 

of property 

rights and 

collective 

action is 

an essential 

part of 

improving the 

livelihoods of 

vulnerable and 

marginalized 

rural groups



