




































Each case demonstrated the central role that various institutional 
arrangements play in all these poverty-related areas. The findings 
showed that institutions—especially collective action and property 
rights—are important for the livelihoods of the poor, but require 
an enabling environment to be effective in reducing poverty. Specific 
findings include:

•	 Successful	collective	action	can	ensure	equitable	natural	resource	
management, but in many cases requires vertical cooperation 
among stakeholders at different levels (communities, the 
government, and the private sector).

•	 Collective	action	around	natural	resource	management	can	serve	
as a catalyst for income-generating activities and a gateway for 
participation in policy processes.

•	 Shocks	play	a	significant	role	in	the	livelihoods	of	the	poor.	Local	
networks and associations can help mitigate idiosyncratic shocks 
that affect individual households, such as illness, but they are less 
effective with respect to covariate shocks such as drought, which 
affect all households in a community.

•	 A	lack	of	clarity	regarding	property	rights	results	in	extensive	
conflict	among	groups,	resulting	in	the	break	down	of	trust	and	
cooperation.

•	 Regardless	of	the	resource	under	consideration,	formalizing	
property rights can lead to a concentration of rights and benefits 
among certain users over others, as well as to exclusion and 
changes in land use toward less compatible uses—all of which 
threaten the welfare of those who are excluded.

•	 Collective	action	can	be	a	useful	mechanism	with	which	to	clarify	
and secure property rights.

The findings show that while collective action and property rights 
have the potential to reduce poverty, they are often biased against 
the poor. However, the case studies also suggest interventions 
that can redress these problems so that collective action and 
property rights institutions can more effectively contribute to 
poverty reduction. Overall, the case studies highlighted the multiple 
dimensions of poverty and the need to take a multidisciplinary 
approach to studying it in order to better inform policies and 
programs aimed at improving the well-being of the poor. 

Esther Mwangi (esther_mwangi@ksg.harvard.edu) is a Giorgio Ruffolo 
Post-doctoral Fellow in Sustainability Science in the Sustainability 
Science Program in the Center for International Development and a Ziff 
Environmental Fellow in the Center for Environment at Harvard University

Helen Markelova (h.markelova@cgiar.org) is a Research Analyst in the 
Environment and Production Technology Division of the International Food 
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)

Ruth Meinzen-Dick (r.meinzen-dick@cgiar.org) is a Senior Research 
Fellow in the Environment and Production Technology Division of the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and Coordinator of the 
Systemwide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights (CAPRi)



