




































Collective Action and Vulnerability: 
Burial Societies in Rural Ethiopia
Stefan Dercon, John Hoddinott, Pramila Krishnan, and Tassew Woldehanna

INTRODUCTION

Collective action has intrinsic value. Being part of a group and participating in meeting common objectives 
provide direct benefits to individuals. In addition, collective 
action has instrumental value; it can help individuals, 
groups, and communities achieve common goals. This 
latter aspect of collective action is the focus of this 
study. Drawing on longitudinal household and qualitative 
community data, the authors examine the impact of shocks 
on household living standards, study the correlates of 
participation in groups and formal and informal networks, 
and discuss the relationship of networks with access to 
other forms of capital. In this context, they assess how 
one form of collective action, iddir, or burial societies, help 
households attenuate the impact of illness, and make some 
policy recommendations.

DATA

The data are from the Ethiopia Rural Household Survey 
(ERHS), a unique longitudinal household data set covering 
households in 15 areas of rural Ethiopia. Data collection 
began in 1989 and was expanded and re-randomized 
in 1994 to yield a sample of 1,477 households that 
are broadly representative of the population shares in 
Ethiopia’s three main sedentary farming systems. Survey 
rounds continued through 2004 and were supplemented 
with qualitative data gathered separately. The surveys 
revealed that these households are very poor, with mean 
incomes about 36 percent below the poverty line, and 
that agriculture provides the dominant source (about two-
thirds) of income.

ShoCkS	in	RuRAL	EthiopiA

Shocks are adverse events that lead to a loss of 
household income or productive assets or a reduction in 
consumption. They may be climatic, economic, political/
social/legal, criminal, or health related. Virtually all 
households in the sample experienced a shock they ranked 
as “most important”; the most common were drought, 
death, and illness. The authors note, however, that at least 
one econometric analysis suggests that experiencing 
a drought at least once in the previous five years and 
experiencing an illness were the only shock variables 
that have a statistically significant effect on consumption. 
However, disaggregating the data reveal that drought 
shocks have more severe effect on female-headed and 
poorer households, and illness shocks matter much more 
in survey areas where malaria is much more common.

NETWORKS, GROUPS,  AND  
CoLLECtivE	ACtion

In the 2004 survey round, households were asked about the 
five most important people they can rely on for support 
in time of need, within the village and elsewhere, as well 
as other people they can rely on in time of need. Over 90 
percent of households report that there is at least one 
person they can rely on for assistance, and the median 
number of people in households’ networks is five. There is 
evidence that households do indeed call on these networks; 
there is also evidence of reciprocity. Most network 
relationships are neighbors, fellow villagers, relatives, and 
people holding adjacent property. Only 12 percent of 
network members are neither relatives nor members of 
the same iddir (burial society). Network members are often 
individuals whom previously the household had borrowed 
from or lent to.

The authors looked at measures of wealth and age and 
find that poorer households have relatively better-off 
households in their networks while richer households tend 
to have relatively poorer households in their networks. 
However, when the number of oxen is the wealth measure, 
households typically have as network partners other 
households with the same numbers of oxen. Networks tend 
to be quite variable when looked at by age; the distribution 
of the difference in age between the household head and 
other individuals in the network who are either relatives or 
members of the same iddir is considerable. 

Few household characteristics are associated with the 
likelihood that a household has at least one person in its 
network. However, being wealthier in terms of landholdings 
is	associated	with	having	a	larger	network.	Larger	
households and households where the head has any formal 
schooling also have larger networks. Family background also 
plays a role: having a parent or relative with important social 
or political positions in the village, or a father who belonged to 
an iddir, increase the mean number of persons in a household’s 
network.

IDDIR	And	thEiR	RoLE	in	mitigAting	
SHOCKS

Members of iddir typically meet once or twice a month, 
making a small payment into a group fund. When a 
member dies, the iddir makes a payment to surviving 
family members. Outside of Tigray, iddir membership is 
widespread: nearly 90 percent of households report that 
they belong to at least one iddir. Two-thirds of iddir appear 
to have no restrictions on membership beyond paying dues 

Realism is 

needed in 

assessing 

the pro-poor 

benefits of 

support to 

collective 

action and 

in terms of 

the ability 

of collective 

action to 

respond to 

shocks.



