




































and fees. In addition to the death benefit, a third of iddir provide 
cash payouts to members when they have experienced other types 
of adverse shocks, such as drought and illness, and a quarter offer 
loans. Two questions arise: Does provision of assistance when illness 
shocks occur reduce their impact on consumption? And if yes, how 
do iddir overcome problems of moral hazard and adverse selection 
that typically bedevil insurance schemes? 

To answer these questions, the authors used a restricted sample 
of villages where iddir that provide health insurance are present 
and other villages where they are not present. Illness shocks 
reported by poor households in villages where no iddir provide 
health insurance are associated with a large reduction in per capita 
consumption. By contrast, the impact of illness shocks on poor 
households in villages where iddir do provide health insurance is not 
statistically significant. 

Enumerators then identified 33 insurance-providing iddir and 
asked members to discuss how the scheme worked. They found 
that most impose some sort of restriction, the most common 
of which is geographic—members must live in the same peasant 
association (PA). Other common restrictions include belonging to 
the same church or mosque or being a woman. The feature uniting 
these shared characteristics is how they address the problem of 
asymmetric information. Restricting membership geographically 
makes it easier to learn about members and monitor their behavior. 
The same is true about the requirement for common church or 
mosque membership. Direct medical costs are observable. For 
example, one iddir reported that “If a member takes the money for 
medication and does not go to clinic/hospital, he will be asked to 
return the money.” About a third of the iddir surveyed stated that 
they had formal checks in place to make sure funds were spent on 
medical costs. Second, a considerable number of iddir conducted 
background checks prior to approving a grant or loan—visiting the 
member at home or asking neighbors to confirm that assistance 
was needed. 

These methods do not, however, address adverse selection—the 
possibility that individuals who anticipate having to incur medical 
expenses in the future would join with the express purpose of 
accessing funds held by the iddir. While iddir do not prevent this 
directly, the imposition of a membership fee for new members 
discourages such behavior.

In addition to these mechanisms for dealing with informational 
asymmetries, iddir take a number of steps to reduce the likelihood 
that the provision of health insurance will lead to financial difficulties 
for the iddir. One is the considerable variation in ages of iddir 
members, which in effect spreads risk across generations—young 

members contribute while older members are more likely to 
have age-related illnesses. Another observation consistent with 
this argument is that youth-only iddir are less likely to provide 
health insurance. A second mechanism is size: the likelihood of 
providing assistance with iddir decreased with the size of the 
membership. Third is that the amount of money provided to 
members is tied fairly tightly to the amount collected. The median 
cash grant provides an amount equal to one month’s income, 
and the maximum cash grant is slightly more than two month’s 
income.	Loans	as	a	ratio	of	monthly	income	tend	to	be	higher	than	
cash grants, but about 75 percent require repayment within three 
months. In addition, most impose sanctions if members do not repay. 

poLiCy	impLiCAtionS

This study suggests that realism is needed in assessing the pro-poor 
benefits of support to collective action. Because wealthier and 
better-educated households tend to participate more in groups and 
have larger networks, we need to pay more attention to identifying 
barriers that prevent other segments of the population from 
participating in collective action. Realism is also needed in terms 
of the ability of collective action to respond to shocks. Specifically, 
where households have limited ability to develop spatial networks, 
collective action has limited ability to respond to covariate shocks. 
Direct public action is more appropriate in this area. 

Collective action may be more suitable for providing an insurance 
function in response to idiosyncratic shocks. Public action and policy 
that supports forms of collective action in this area must recognize, 
as exemplified by the iddirs, that successful collective action is based 
on norms of trust and reciprocity. As trust is easier to destroy than 
create, the principal of “do no harm” is important here, particularly 
when government actions are aimed toward existing collective 
action institutions.
  

Stefan Dercon (Stefan.Dercon@economics.oxford.ac.uk) is Professor 
of Development Economics, University of Oxford and Fellow of Wolfson 
College

John Hoddinott (J.Hoddinott@cgiar.org) is a deputy division director in the 
Food Consumption and Nutrition Division of the International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI)

Pramila Krishnan (Pramila.Krishnan@econ.cam.ac.uk) is Senior Lecturer, 
Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge and Fellow, Jesus College

Tassew Woldehanna (wtassew@econ.aau.edu.et) is Assistant Professor at 
the Department of Economics, Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia



