




































Identifying 

barriers that 

prevent the 

poor from 

participating 

in collective 

action is an 

important 

task because 

accumulating 

social capital 

does not come 

easily to the 

poor.

Collective Action and Vulnerability:  
Local	and	migrant	networks	in	Bukidnon,	philippines
 agnEs r. QuisuMbing, scott McnivEn, and MariE godQuin

INTRODUCTION

This study examines the role of groups and networks in helping poor Filipinos manage their exposure to risks 
and cope with shocks. It brings together two strands of 
literature that examine how social capital affects economic 
variables and investigate the processes by which social 
capital formation, participation in networks and groups, 
and trusting behavior comes about. Specifically, the study 
seeks to understand the shocks rural households face and 
how the impacts of shocks differ according to household 
characteristics; characterize the formal and informal 
groups and networks households join and determine 
whether exposure to risk encourages membership in such 
groups; and quantify the returns to membership in formal 
and informal groups and networks.

DATA AND CONTExT

The data come from a longitudinal study of households 
in southern Bukidnon, a province of Northern Mindanao. 
The original 1984/85 four-round survey investigated the 
effects of agricultural commercialization on nutrition 
and household welfare in about 500 households. In 2003, 
two rounds of quantitative data were collected from 
61 percent of the original respondents using a survey 
questionnaire	that	closely	reflected	the	one	used	in	
1984/85. In 2004, 257 households formed by children who 
no longer live in their origin barangays (small communities 
of 50 to 100 families) were interviewed in major urban 
areas in Northern Mindanao as well as households in 
municipality seats and other rural areas of Bukidnon.

ShoCkS	in	Bukidnon,	phiLippinES

Drought shocks have the greatest impact on households 
whose landholdings are below the median land size, 
households with below median net worth of assets, and 
(surprisingly) households with greater than median levels 
of schooling. Death of the head or spouse significantly 
reduces per capita consumption for households that 
had land in 1984 and for households above the median 
landholding size in 1984. 

Short- and longer-term impacts also differ across 
household types. The impact of the 1987/88 drought was 
felt most strongly by households with no land in 1984, 
households with less than median landholdings and less 
than median net worth, and households with greater 
than median schooling. However, more recent drought 
shocks no longer had significant impacts on consumption, 
indicating that mechanisms to cope with covariate shocks 
have improved over time.  Sudden increases in input prices, 

however, significantly reduced per capita consumption in 
both the later and earlier periods. Not surprisingly, the 
burden of input price shocks in both periods was felt by 
households with more land and assets whose exposure 
to input shock risk is greater.

GROUPS AND NETWORKS IN  
Bukidnon,	phiLippinES

Households provided information on 689 groups, which 
were classified into production, credit, burial, religious, 
and civic groups. Membership in groups is widespread, 
with religious groups the most frequently mentioned and 
civic groups the least mentioned. 
Households also belong to diverse trust-based networks. 
Seventy-five percent report having a network to turn to 
in case of economic loss, with the highest asset quartile 
being the best insured. Only 48 percent of households 
report having a network for technology adoption and 
copying (perhaps because farmers rely on the formal 
extension system). Households belonging to the lower 
asset quartiles belong to fewer groups, as do households 
further from the town center. Households that 
experienced more negative shocks in the past belong to 
more groups.

Wealthier households are more likely to take part in 
productive groups. Not surprisingly, households engaged 
in agricultural or nonagricultural production are more 
likely to be members of productive groups, with being 
an agricultural producer having a greater marginal 
impact. The household’s position in the asset distribution 
has a significant impact on the probability of joining a 
credit group, with the second and third asset quartiles 
significantly less likely to join relative to the wealthiest 
quartile. Both ethnic and educational heterogeneity have 
a negative impact on participation in credit groups. 

Burial groups are found in almost all Philippine 
communities. In comparison to production and credit 
groups, being less wealthy does not pose a significant 
barrier to participation. Participation in burial groups 
also crosses occupational categories, although ethnic and 
economic village heterogeneity dampens the desire to 
join burial groups. Compared to production, credit, or 
burial groups, religious and civic groups do not focus on 
economic motives. Nevertheless, households with more 
human capital are more likely to participate in such groups. 



