




































The total number of groups to which a household belongs does 
not affect the density of its networks, but households with more 
human and physical capital have larger social networks. There is 
weak evidence that networks perform a risk-smoothing function, 
since the number of shocks experienced increases the number of 
persons that one can turn to for help. Interestingly, the number 
of daughters living outside the villages exerts a strong negative 
influence	on	the	size	of	one’s	local	trust-based	networks.		this	
result stems from differences in expectations of parental support 
from sons and daughters.  Daughters, who are more educated 
than sons, typically migrate and send remittances to support their 
parents.

ECONOMIC RETURNS TO GROUPS  
AND NETWORKS

The total number of groups to which a household belongs has  
a positive and significant impact on per capita expenditures—and 
this is true for membership in burial, religious, and civic groups  
as well. 

Insights from qualitative work among respondent households 
that experienced covariate and idiosyncratic shocks suggest that 
local networks have only a limited ability to help households 
cope, especially in case of a covariate shock. For example, 
several respondents said they feel embarrassed to ask for help 
from friends and neighbors. When faced with negative shocks, 
households use a variety of coping mechanisms, including working 
harder, relying on help from children who have left home, and 
borrowing money from informal sources.

Remittances perform an important consumption-smoothing 
function for parents, with households experiencing more shocks 
being more likely to receive remittances and in larger amounts. 
Schooling attainment of daughters, but not sons, increases both 
the probability of receipt and amounts received. While positive 
shocks to migrant incomes increase both the probability of receipt 
and amounts received, positive shocks experienced by daughters 
result in much bigger remittances to parents than shocks 
experienced by sons.  

Investment in migrant networks has both positive and negative 
consequences for parents.  The number of migrants has significant 
negative impacts on expenditures on clothing and footwear, family 
events, alcohol and tobacco, and a weak negative impact on health 
expenditures. Remittances, on the other hand, have significant 
positive impacts on housing and consumer durables, total value of 
nonland assets, total expenditure per adult equivalent, and other 
expenditures.

ConCLuSionS

The finding that accumulation of social capital comes easier to the 
wealthy is sobering news for development agencies that encourage 
the poor to invest in “social capital” because they assume that it 
is easier to acquire than physical assets. However, participation 
in less economically oriented groups such as religious, civic, and 
insurance groups is less closely associated with initial wealth than 
participation in production and credit groups.

Different aspects of heterogeneity matter in the formation and 
conduct of collective action institutions. Disparities in ethnicity, 
assets, and education at the village level are likely to discourage 
the formation of groups, although they do not affect the 
formation of trust-based networks. Thus, external heterogeneity 
is not necessarily “good” for social capital formation. However, 
heterogeneity with respect to location may be important in 
insurance against covariate shocks. For example, networks of 
spatially-diversified children—especially daughters—perform an 
important insurance function against covariate shocks that may 
not be achievable by local networks. 

poLiCy	impLiCAtionS

First, identifying barriers that prevent the poor from participating 
in collective action is an important task because accumulating 
social capital does not come easily to the poor. Poorer folk often 
express discomfort at approaching wealthier individuals for help. 
Feelings of discomfort may interfere with efforts to have a more 
heterogeneous mix of households in groups, but the shame may 
be tempered if the richer individual is a relative. Familial networks 
therefore play an important role in helping poor people cope with 
shocks.

Second, covariate shocks are the appropriate arena for public 
policy because local networks and other forms of collective action 
have limited effectiveness in dealing with such shocks. Even if 
migrant remittances respond to covariate shocks, substantial time 
lags may be involved, and not all households in a locality may have 
access to remittances. 

Third, certain types of groups and networks may be more 
effective in providing insurance against some types of idiosyncratic 
shocks. These tend to be the sort of shocks where, because of 
information asymmetries, public action may be less effective. Public 
action should therefore take on an enabling role, for example, by 
facilitating interventions that reduce the costs of remittances or of 
developing and maintaining family networks. 

Finally, policies to help poor households cope with shocks must 
take into account Filipino social and organizational culture and 
discourage displacement of already existing indigenous networks.

Agnes R. Quisumbing (a.quisumbing@cgiar.org) is a Senior Research 
Fellow in the Food Consumption and Nutrition Division of the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)

Marie Godquin (mgodquin@googlemail.com) obtained her Ph.D. in 
Economics from University of Paris I- La Sorbonne and is affiliated with 
the INRA-LEA Research Center in Paris
 
Scott McNiven ( mcniven@primal.ucdavis.edu) is a PhD student in 
Agricultural and Resource Economics at the University of California at 
Davis



