




































BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE

Market institutions transmit information, mediate transactions, facilitate enforcement of property 
rights and contracts, and manage competition. They also 
address market failures that arise due to asymmetric 
information, high transaction costs, and imperfectly 
specified property rights. Without supporting market 
institutions, rural markets tend to be thin and imperfect, 
leading to high marketing and transaction costs. 
Important market players fail to undertake profitable 
investments, leading to coordination failures that further 
hinder market functions. Associated shocks and market 
risks also worsen imperfections and transaction failures. 
Institutional innovations that reduce transaction costs 
and enhance coordination of marketing functions in 
rural markets—such as producer marketing groups 
(PMGs) that make use of collective action—can help 
overcome these problems.

PMGs can enhance market opportunities for small 
producers by coordinating production, facilitating 
access to better markets, reducing marketing costs, 
and synchronizing buying and selling with seasonal 
price conditions. However, collective action is critical 
to realizing this potential and is only likely to occur 
when expected gains outweigh the associated costs of 
complying with collective rules and norms.

This case study of PMGs in eastern Kenya identifies 
the potentials and constraints for rural institutions 
to provide market services for small-scale farmers. It 
analyzes the role of institutional and organizational 
innovations in improving the performance of rural 
agricultural markets in less favored areas with relatively 
poor market infrastructure, and highlights marketing 
outcomes and the potential causes of differential success 
of marketing groups in relation to marketing and other 
functions 

DATA

Data were obtained from a baseline and follow-up 
survey conducted in Mbeere and Makueni districts of 
semi-arid Eastern Province of Kenya. These districts 
were selected because of the importance of dryland 
legumes in the livelihoods of the poor smallholder 
farmers and the potential to target these crops to 
reduce poverty and vulnerability. A baseline survey of 

400 households was undertaken in 2003 before PMGs 
were formed. Households were randomly sampled 
from a list of all households in the sample villages, and 
the distribution of members and non-members was 
decided after the PMGs had been established on the 
basis of committed and paid up members.  Baseline 
information involved poverty indicators, agricultural 
production, market participation, and adoption of 
agricultural technologies. 

A follow-up survey in 2005 in the same districts 
collected multi-level qualitative and quantitative data 
on broader trends in demographic and resource 
use patterns, socioeconomic conditions, and overall 
economic profiles of targeted rural villages. Data 
obtained from PMGs included objectives and 
aspirations of the groups, group characteristics, 
asset ownership, credit access, grading and quality 
control, bulking and marketing, governance, and 
major constraints to collective marketing. At the 
household level, data were collected from randomly 
selected households comprising 250 members and 
150 non-members. Information obtained included 
data on socioeconomic characteristics, assets, credit 
and savings, production, buying and selling, and 
participation in collective marketing. 

RESuLtS

Collective marketing and its outcomes 
Consumers, PMGs, and schools respectively paid 
about Ksh 7, Ksh 6, and Ksh 4 over the prices paid 
by brokers/assemblers. This shows that PMGs can 
be attractive market outlets for small producers. 
Furthermore, farmers selling their produce at harvest 
earned about Ksh 1.5/kg less than those who delayed 
selling for four to five months. This shows that PMGs 
could exploit seasonal price differentials through 
bulking and storage. 
 
The higher prices paid by the PMGs to member 
farmers came at a cost of delayed payments. In contrast, 
competing buyers paid on delivery or shortly thereafter. 
This may explain why cash-constrained farmers opted 
to sell through other channels. The average income lost 
by selling through the broker channel amounted to 
about Ksh 4,488/yr, or 7.4 percent of the poverty line 
income. However, in many cases, the imperfect rural 

Rural Market Imperfections and the 
Role of Institutions for Collective Action 
to Improve Markets for the Poor
bEkElE shifEraw, gidEon obarE, and gEoffrEy Muricho

Producer 

marketing 

groups (PMGs) 

were able to 

improve market 

opportunities 

and enhance 

links to 

secondary 

and tertiary 

markets 

through better 

coordination 

of production 

and marketing 

activities.



