



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Nancy McCarthy (n.mccarthy@cgiar.org) is a research fellow at the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).

community groups can manage these externalities more
successfully.

WHY ARE SOME COMMUNITIES MORE 
SUCCESSFUL THAN OTHERS IN PROVIDING 
PUBLIC GOODS?

Although the incentive structure determines in part how difficult
it will be to undertake any particular collective activity, there are
also characteristics of the group that determine the cost of
doing so.

Any factors that enhance a group’s ability to identify
common goals, work together, and negotiate in good faith will
enhance cooperative capacity and thus reduce the costs of
undertaking collective action.Trust among members was one of
the first factors to be identified. A history of successful collec-
tive action also improves chances of continuing success in an
expanded set of activities, creating a virtuous circle. Social,
economic, and cultural heterogeneity have long been thought to
reduce cooperative capacity because such diversity makes it
difficult to find mutually beneficial arrangements. Sociocultural
diversity may also improve cooperative capacity, however, by
widening the possible set of cooperative arrangements and
avoiding institutional inertia. Recognition and support from
external agencies, such as government, enhances the authority of
the group to engage in collective action. More participatory
forums for setting the collective action agenda and implementing
activities, transparency and accountability mechanisms, and
credible and fair conflict resolution mechanisms all contribute to
successes in collective action.

Other factors may affect both cooperative capacity and
individual incentives. For instance, increases in group size may
increase individual incentives to free ride. On the other hand,
having more members can initially defray the costs per member.
As membership continues to increase, cooperation becomes
more costly owing to higher negotiation, monitoring, and
enforcement costs. Unequal distribution of wealth and opportu-
nities to work outside of the community also affect cooperative
capacity and incentives.

IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICYMAKERS

Where externalities are relatively localized, community
members may be better able to provide public goods because
they are more knowledgeable about local conditions than are
outsiders.As policymakers determine how best to aid communi-
ties in their quest to provide public goods, it is important that
they carefully consider both individual incentives to provide
particular public goods and the factors affecting communities’
capacity to cooperate. For instance, improving a community’s
capacity to cooperate will have spillover benefits for all public

goods provision and so might form part of a national strategy to
improve collective action. In highly heterogeneous communities,
however, a focus on conflict management and resolution mecha-
nisms may be the most useful intervention. Elsewhere, it may be
more relevant to disseminate information on organizational
tools.

Where policymakers are making decisions on devolving
responsibility for specific public goods to the community, they
must undertake a realistic assessment of individual incentives to
engage in collective action. This means assessing the underlying
technological characteristics, gauging the uncertainty, or the vari-
ability, of the benefits to be realized, and determining the extent
to which other public (or even private) goods and services
affect the potential returns from the particular activity. The
costs of making, monitoring, and enforcing agreements vary
according to the underlying incentive structure and are highest
in the “prisoner’s dilemma.” The appropriate organizational
structure, procedural rules for making and enforcing agreements,
and determination of fines or rewards will also differ depending
on the incentive structure, and projects and policies must take
this into account.

Finally, there are certain situations where institutions above
the local level need to operate. Under these conditions, local
groups and local and national government agencies need to
coordinate and cooperate through “co-management,” or nested
arrangements.The burden should not fall on communities alone.

The importance of determining the relative costs and
benefits of promoting community-based collective action before
wide-scale policies and programs are implemented cannot be
overemphasized, particularly in the context of government-led
devolution and decentralization policies.Without a clear under-
standing of costs and benefits, project managers and government
agencies may well impose upon the community the responsibility
for providing a public good or service for which social costs well
outweigh the benefits.Worse still, failure in collective action now
will have a negative impact on the capacity of the community to
engage in successful collective action in the future. ■

For further reading see A. Knox, R. Meinzen-Dick, and P.
Hazell,“Property Rights, Collective Action, and Technologies
for Natural Resource Management:A Conceptual
Framework,” CAPRi Working Paper 1 (Washington, DC:
IFPRI, 1998); E. Ostrom, Crafting Institutions for Self-Governing
Irrigation Systems (San Francisco: ICS Press, 1992);T. Sandler,
Collective Action:Theory and Applications (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1992); N. McCarthy, C. Dutilly-
Diané, and B. Drabo,“Cooperation, Collective Action and
Natural Resources Management in Burkina Faso:A
Methodological Note,” CAPRi Working Paper 27 (Washington
DC: IFPRI, 2002).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



