



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 5 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Property Rights, Collective Action, and Agroforestry
FRANK PLACE, KEIJIRO OTSUKA, AND SARA SCHERR

Agroforestry is about integrated agricultural systems inwhich trees play a prominent role.Agroforestry can
provide a variety of functions or benefits for farmers and
communities.The most easily identifiable are the tree products
consumed by humans: fuelwood, timber, poles, fruits, medicines,
and resins.A second group of benefits consists of the services
provided by trees to other agricultural activities of the farmer:
fodder, green manure, shade, soil conservation, and stakes.A
third group includes the communitywide or even global benefits
from agroforestry systems: biodiversity, watershed protection,
carbon sequestration, and microclimate regulation. In this brief,
we explore the role that social institutions—specifically
property rights and collective action—may play in the develop-
ment of agroforestry.

Different agroforestry systems require different periods of
time to develop and manage. Depending upon what benefits are
sought, farmers will adopt varying degrees of joint action or
coordination within the landscape. Over longer time periods,
property rights increase in importance; over larger areas, collec-
tive action becomes more important.The figure shows how
different types of agroforestry outputs or activities will demand
different levels of property rights or collective action.

PROPERTY RIGHTS AND AGROFORESTRY

To justify investing in trees, a household or group must have
reasonable assurance of receiving the benefits from their invest-
ments. Investors must have confidence that tenure will be secure
in the future. In much of the world, the rights to plant, harvest,
and benefit from trees are linked to underlying land rights. In
places where individuals or households have acquired land on a
permanent basis, through purchase or inheritance for example,
they almost always have rights to plant and harvest trees.

Complications arise when government regulations protect a
particular tree, when a tree is naturally growing and perhaps
predates a household’s occupation of the land, or when there
are overlapping rights (for example, between two families). In
these cases rights to the trees may be contested. In the mailo
tenure system in Uganda, both owners and long-term tenants
claim strong rights to land. Customary or formal legal rules may
grant certain tree rights to non-landowners.The poor may be
granted collection rights to fallen tree fruits or dead branches
for fuelwood, or pastoralists may be given access to tree fodder
in the dry season.

There are also situations where rights and incentives to
plant trees are weak.This is the case with land acquired on a
temporary basis, for example, through sharecropping arrange-
ments. Land rights may not be conducive to tree planting when
the state is the de jure owner of all land. In some cases rights to
land are conditional on certain behavior. In matrilocal societies
such as in southern Malawi, husbands’ rights to land are condi-
tional on their continued marriage to the wife, and in patrilocal
societies women do much of the agricultural work but lose their
rights if the marriage ends. In parts of Africa, women may lack
individual rights to plant trees that produce direct consumer
products, although they may be allowed to plant trees for other
purposes. Local custom or law often defines specific types of
rights, such as the rights of neighbors to harvest products from
farm boundary plantings or to plant trees that will block the
sunlight to a neighbor’s house.

The importance of tree tenure must also be considered at a
landscape level.Where farmers have unfettered access to trees
in woodlands or forests, their incentives to plant trees on their
own land are reduced, even if their rights to plant are unques-
tioned. By the same token, if farmers lose access rights to
communal land, such as when land is designated a restricted
conservation area, incentives to plant trees in household plots
might increase. In strong communal land tenure systems,
communities may be encouraged to establish agroforestry
systems that provide communal benefits, such as riverine vegeta-
tion or common dry season tree fodder reserves.

In customary tenure systems, individual rights to land are
granted to those who invest in the land. In the past the major

Relative Importance of Property Rights and
Collective Action in Agroforestry

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



