



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Frank Place (f.place@cgiar.org) is a theme leader and economist at the World Agroforestry Centre, Nairobi; Keijiro Otsuka (otsuka@grips.ac.jp) is director of
the Graduate Program of the Foundation for Advanced Studies in International Development (FASID) and professor at the National Graduate Program for
Policy Studies, both in Tokyo; and Sara Scherr (sscherr@aol.com) is a senior policy analyst at Forest Trends in Washington, DC, and an adviser to Future
Harvest.

investment required to open up new land consisted of clearing
trees, and so deforestation became associated with increased
individual tenure security.Today, with virgin land all but disap-
pearing, new types of investments are more commonly made to
secure tenure on customary lands.Tree planting happens to be
one of the easiest and most durable investments people can
make to prevent the emergence of claims to the land from
other family members, villagers, or authorities. In situations
where tree planting can enhance tenure security, it is not
necessarily the initial level of tenure security that determines
the extent of tree planting, but the expected tenure security at
the time the benefits accrue.As a result, one may well observe
significant tree planting in areas where tenure security is
perceived to be relatively low.This tendency also applies to the
state. Establishing plantations on customary land can be a way
for the state to reassert its rights over customary legal
systems.This larger goal of expanding control explains why
local communities in various parts of Southeast Asia have
burned or encroached on state-run eucalyptus plantations.

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND AGROFORESTRY 

Most agroforestry systems can be established on individual
plots and managed without explicit collective action. But
collective action can increase the effectiveness of agroforestry,
either by reducing risks or costs or by enabling positive exter-
nalities to occur. Examples include collecting and mixing tree
seeds to prevent genetic deterioration, managing group
nurseries to take advantage of scarce water sources, estab-
lishing grazing rules to prevent browsing of seedlings, and
collectively guarding valuable tree stands to reduce protection
costs.

For agroforestry systems intended to produce community-
wide agricultural or environmental benefits, other types of
collective action are essential for establishment and manage-
ment. Examples include the coordinated planting of trees to
reduce soil erosion in a watershed or to establish a communi-
tywide windbreak (such as was done to protect dairy calves
and coffee trees in Costa Rica) and the joint fencing of lands
to restore natural woody vegetation for biodiversity and water
management (as has been done by large farms in Australia).
These examples of collective action for agroforestry are seen
throughout the world.

Although nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) or
external projects often attempt to create new local organiza-
tions to carry out such activities, mobilizing existing local
groups can be more effective over the long term. Even if the
work is new to these existing groups, they can be successful
because social capital (trust and mutual obligations) and orga-
nizational systems are already established.

RELEVANT LESSONS FOR AGROFORESTRY

As shown in the figure, the importance of property rights or
collective action arrangements for management incentives will
depend on the particular agroforestry-related task, product, or
service being evaluated. Consider the difference between
timber and nontimber forest products. In the case of a timber
plantation (lower right portion of the figure), incentives to
invest and manage determine the level of benefits received.
Since it is relatively simple to detect harvesting activities and
the size of timber area is often limited, it is easy to protect the
trees. In such a case, a clear private property rights system
leads to an efficient management outcome. In the case of
woodlands (upper left portion of the figure), the protection of
nontimber products is costly but tree management is not very
important because of relatively low returns to improved
management for these lower-value products. In this case,
collective protection under a common property regime system
often works best. Finally, effective property rights or collective
action arrangements need not be formalized. In many examples
throughout the world, indigenous systems provide appropriate
incentives for the development of agroforestry systems.

Social institutions for property rights and collective action
clearly shape agroforestry investments.Agroforestry develop-
ment initiatives must consider these institutions as they work
with local people to identify suitable tree species, agroforestry
systems, planting sites, and management systems. In the short
term, there may be limited scope to modify these institutions
but considerable room to work creatively within them. Over
the medium to long term, the development of property rights
and organizations for collective action will be critical to
improved land management, including agroforestry.

In the future, property rights and collective action will play
increasingly pivotal roles in defining rights and responsibilities
over the externalities of tree management practices.As stake-
holders recognize the need for effective management of, for
example, the erosion resulting from tree felling or rights to
carbon sequestration from tree planting, they will increasingly
value and depend on the institutions that protect their 
property rights. ■

For further reading see R. Meinzen-Dick,A. Knox, F. Place,
and B. Swallow, eds., Innovation in Natural Resource
Management:The Role of Property Rights and Collective Action
in Developing Countries (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2002); K. Otsuka and F. Place, eds., Land Tenure and
Natural Resource Management:A Comparative Study of
Agrarian Communities in Asia and Africa (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2001).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



