



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 6 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Irrigation, Collective Action, and Property Rights 
DOUGLAS L. VERMILLION

Approximately 40 percent of the world’s food and 60percent of its grain is produced under irrigation. Between
1900 and 1950 the total area under irrigation worldwide nearly
doubled, rising from about 48 million to 94 million hectares, and
by 2000 it had more than doubled again, reaching 240 million
hectares.This dramatic expansion in irrigated area has
produced an enormous and expensive infrastructure.
Governments already straining under fiscal deficits often find
themselves unable to meet the costs of adequately operating,
maintaining, rehabilitating, and upgrading these systems without
enlisting user participation.

SHIFT IN ROLES BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS AND
WATER USERS

Governments are now shifting their role from direct manage-
ment of irrigation systems to regulation of the water sector,
provision of support services to water user associations, and
capacity building among water user associations and irrigation
service providers. During the past two decades more than 40
developing countries in Africa,Asia, Latin America, and the
Middle East have adopted programs to transfer the manage-
ment of irrigation systems from government agencies to water
user associations. Sometimes irrigation management transfer
programs have focused on organizing water user associations
and assigning responsibilities to them but have not transferred
appropriate property rights and authority nor provided
strategic planning to change the roles and modalities of
government.There have not been adequate incentives and
accountability mechanisms for all parties concerned.

STATE- AND FARMER-SPONSORED INVESTMENT

Water users are not normally active contributors to state-
sponsored irrigation projects.These users usually have no sense
of ownership of or responsibility for irrigation systems that are
built, repaired, and staffed by governments. Since water user
associations are not generally formed before construction,
farmers do not participate in decisionmaking and their water
rights within the irrigation system are not clearly defined. For
these reasons, and because the water service is so often poorly
defined and provided, farmers are unwilling to pay irrigation
service fees.When governments are unable to mobilize
adequate resources to finance irrigation, the condition of infra-
structure and the quality of water services decline further.

By contrast, traditional irrigation systems have been
developed and managed by local farmer groups in many parts
of the world. In many cases such systems have been operated,
maintained, and improved by local people for decades and even
centuries. Research shows that a fundamental reason for their
long-term viability is that they are founded on locally derived

principles of water and land rights, rules, and obligations.Water
rights are often embedded in the infrastructure itself. For
example, many systems use proportioning weirs—structures
that divide shares of water to fields on the basis of propor-
tional rights to water allocated by the local community.Those
shares, or water rights, are often based on farmers’ previous
investments in collectively developing or maintaining the
system. Obligations of water users are linked to property
rights through community-based rules that are in turn backed
by the social force of the community.

Such traditions sometimes break down in the face of
state-sponsored development. In South Sumatra, Indonesia, for
example, the government, with no participation from the local
community, installed a water division box on a site where
farmers had previously used a traditional water-proportioning
weir.After construction of the new division box, the farmers
promptly reinstalled their proportioning weir just below it.This
case illustrates the importance of designing property rights,
local institutions, and infrastructure in an integrated way.

The limitations of state-sponsored irrigation are now
widely recognized. For irrigation systems to be productive and
sustainable, water users must play a larger role in their gover-
nance, financing, and management.To motivate water users to
act collectively in support of the system, decisionmakers must
adopt democratic processes with appropriate incentives and
accountability arrangements.

PROPERTY RIGHTS FOR WATER USERS

The most important incentives for gaining the support of water
user associations are clear and recognized rights over water,
land, and infrastructure.The most important of these rights
include the following:

•  the right to use, both on individual farms and for the irriga-
tion system as a whole, a certain amount or share of water
of an acceptable quality;

•  the right to cultivate land and choose what crops to plant,
with collective protection against conversion of irrigated
land to other uses;

•  the right to use, repair, and improve irrigation infrastructure;

•  the right to determine what irrigation services will be
provided and by whom;

•  the right to adopt rules, irrigation service plans, and budgets;

•  the right to establish, collect, and use an irrigation service
fee (without having to transmit the funds to the govern-
ment);

•  the right to assign penalties, settle disputes, and obtain
legal support;

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



