



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Douglas L.Vermillion (d.vermillion@cgiar.org) is a principal researcher at the International Water Management Institute in Thailand.

•  the right to give consent to or refuse external assistance;
and

•  the right to maintain representation in a higher-level public
council at the river basin or district level.

Agriculture and economic policies can have a profound
effect on farmer incentives to invest in irrigation. In many
countries, inexpensive imports, low crop prices, and high input
prices result in low or nil profit margins for irrigated agricul-
ture.This constrains the ability of water user associations to
pay more for irrigation services. In some countries it may be
necessary to increase the price of food crops to reflect real
production costs or otherwise earmark consumption taxes to
finance part of the cost of irrigation.

SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF IRRIGATION
SYSTEMS

Since irrigation systems are integrated hydraulic networks,
their management should also be integrated. For medium and
large-scale irrigation systems, the principle of federating local
water user associations up to higher levels of the system has
been adopted in several states of India and in China, Indonesia,
and Mexico.

For sustainable management of groundwater irrigation, the
aquifer is the unit that should be managed in an integrated way.
Some pilot areas, especially in South Asia, are beginning to
adopt this principle. Local associations of groundwater users
regulate small aquifers or incorporate groundwater manage-
ment into conjunctive management of canal irrigation systems
with irrigation departments. Establishing effective property
rights over groundwater can be difficult because it is often hard
to measure the stock of the resource, its boundaries, and the
movement of the aquifer, or the amount of water extracted.

CONCLUSION

Increasingly, governments are realizing that motivating water
users to take over responsibility for financing and managing irri-
gation systems requires transferring the authority to govern irri-
gation systems to water users as well. Governments should
reorient how they relate to water user associations so that a
new partnership is created to  (1) empower water user associa-
tions with property rights and governing authority, (2) ensure
that governments provide support services and regulate the
sector at the macro level, and (3) establish cost sharing for irri-
gation investment. Irrigation management transfer becomes part
of a more comprehensive, participatory, and strategic reform
process for the irrigation sector.

International experience suggests that successful irrigation
sector reform programs establish both a policy working group
and a national secretariat that help to guide and coordinate the
planning and implementation of the reform process.The process
should include:

•  strategic, participatory planning,

•  research and stakeholder consultations,

•  mobilization of political support,

•  design and adoption of an appropriate policy, legal, institu-
tional, and regulatory framework,

•  strategy to coordinate lending and technical assistance,

•  public awareness campaigns, and

•  monitoring, evaluations, and course corrections.

It is ironic that the huge investments in constructing irriga-
tion systems have not been followed with commensurate invest-
ments in sustainable management of these systems. In order to
meet the growing demand for food in the future under condi-
tions of increasing competition for water, it is vital that farmers
become more active participants in governing and managing irri-
gation systems. ■

For further reading see A. Subramanian, N.V. Jagannathan, and
R. Meinzen-Dick, eds.,“User Organizations for Sustainable
Water Services,” World Bank Technical Paper No. 354
(Washington, DC:World Bank, 1997); D. L.Vermillion and J.A.
Sagardoy,“Transfer of Irrigation Management Services:
Guidelines,” FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 48
(Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, 1999); E. Ostrom, Crafting Institutions for Self-
Governing Irrigation Systems (San Francisco: Institute for
Contemporary Studies Press, 1992).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



