



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 7 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Collective Action and Property Rights in Fisheries Management
MAHFUZUDDIN AHMED, K. KUPERAN VISWANATHAN, AND R.A.VALMONTE-SANTOS

Until the late 1960s, villagers on the island of San Salvador inthe Philippines enjoyed open and unrestricted access to an
abundance of coastal resources. In the early 1970s an influx of
migrants, combined with the integration of the village economy
into the international market for aquarium fish and a shift to
destructive fishing operations, ruined the local fishing grounds,
and conflicts erupted. Government claims of full control over
the use and protection of marine and coastal resources did not
stop the depletion or degradation of the resource.

The developing world presents many similar examples
where central government management of fisheries resources is
unable to either reduce overfishing or counteract destructive
fishing methods.The state often lacks the capacity to enforce
property rights and regulations on resource use.

Fisheries are complex and interdependent ecological and
social systems that require integrated management approaches.
The actions of one person or group of users affect the avail-
ability of the resource for others. Managing such common pool
resources requires conscious efforts by a broad range of stake-
holders to organize and craft rules enabling equitable and
sustainable use of the resources for everyone’s benefit.
Collective action is often a prerequisite for the development of
community-based institutions and the devolution of authority
that is required from central to local authorities.

COLLECTIVE ACTION IN FISHERIES

There is extensive evidence that communities can improve the
conditions of the shared resources on which they depend. Over
the past decade, the community of San Salvador has organized
and established, with the help of government intervention, a
marine sanctuary and reserve.An arrangement for community-
based management of coastal resources fostered collective
action by forming and strengthening local organizations.These
organizations became responsible for marine resource manage-
ment and income-generating projects, and they reduced over-
fishing and other destructive practices.A local ordinance banned
fishing within the sanctuary and allowed only nondestructive
fishing methods in the marine reserve.The local municipal
council passed an ordinance providing legal protection for the
sanctuary. From 1988 to 1996, the average fish catch increased,
and living coral cover and the number of coral species doubled.

But not all efforts to establish collective action in fisheries
are successful. Research in Bangladesh suggests that the bound-
aries of the bodies of water, the scale of the resource, and the
type of fishery all play a significant role in determining whether
efforts to foster collective action succeed. Existing property
rights also influenced the types of new institutions for collective
action that could be established. One community in Bangladesh
was unable to regulate access to the closed fishing grounds
where leaseholders had historically controlled access to and

stocking of carp, even after community-based fisheries manage-
ment was introduced and individual leasing was discontinued.
Only through successful collective action was it possible to
protect group rights over individual ones.

PROPERTY RIGHTS ARRANGEMENTS

Private, state, or community control each has its own limitations
in fisheries management. Private ownership often has prohibi-
tively expensive enforcement costs and unequal distributional
outcomes. Direct state control has high information costs and
often lacks monitoring mechanisms, trained personnel, or
financial resources. In some cases community control excludes
the poorest people from access to a common property
resource, increasing inequality. Combining state, private, and
community control over fisheries in imaginative ways can offer
more efficient, equitable, and sustainable management.This
combination is often referred to as co-management.

Co-management in fisheries involves the active participation
and cooperation of government, nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), organized fishers’ groups, and other stakeholders in
management decisions. It can help build cross-institutional
collective action. It represents a more democratic governance
system than state management because users are more involved
in determining the rights over the fishery and in sharing decision-
making authority. It improves management efficacy by drawing
on local knowledge and securing higher compliance with rules.

AN EXAMPLE OF SUCCESSFUL CO-MANAGEMENT

Fisheries management involves multiple natural and human
settings. San Miguel Bay in the Philippines is a multispecies, multi-
gear bay surrounded by 3 cities and 74 coastal villages whose
major livelihood is fishing. Since the 1980s conventional fisheries
management problems—overfishing, distributional inequity, and
limited economic opportunities—and negative impacts from
various coastal and land-based sectors have been evident.

Here in the 1990s the WorldFish Center conducted an issue-
based, multisectoral, and multidisciplinary analysis (including ecolog-
ical, economic, social, political, and administrative perspectives) that
led to the production of a coastal environmental profile, a technical
report detailing the status of fisheries, and an integrated fisheries
management plan.The management plan included financing and
monitoring schemes, participatory implementation plans involving
diverse organizations and institutional levels, and the establishment
of the San Miguel Bay Fisheries Management Council, composed of
provincial and municipal government representatives, NGOs,
academic institutions, and various local organizations.

San Miguel’s experience highlights (1) the critical role of an
appropriate human perception of the situation; (2) the impor-
tance of collective action and stakeholder participation at key
stages of research, planning, and implementation; (3) the useful-

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



