



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Mahfuzuddin Ahmed (m.ahmed@cgiar.org) is principal scientist and leader of the Policy Research and Impact Assessment Program at the WorldFish Center in
Penang, Malaysia; K. Kuperan Viswanathan (k.viswanathan@cgiar.org) is a research scientist and project leader, and R.A.Valmonte-Santos (b.santos@cgiar.org)
is an assistant scientist, also at the WorldFish Center.

ness of structured decision methods for research, planning, and
associated debates; and (4) the efficacy of research combined
with planning efforts to ensure its utilization and relevance on
the one hand and to provide a scientific basis for management
planning on the other.

EMPOWERING COMMUNITIES 

Unfortunately, governments rarely undertake co-management as
a means of empowering fishing communities and increasing
democracy. Instead, governments often consider co-management
an instrument to achieve their objectives more efficiently by
involving fishing communities in the implementation process. Part
of the problem is that the organizational structures of govern-
ment departments have not adapted to the new co-management
concept. Most fisheries departments are still staffed with natural
scientists and are almost exclusively focused on resource conser-
vation rather than on fishing communities’ livelihoods.

Collective action can help to empower poor communities,
as the example of San Salvador Island shows. But effective co-
management requires government to devolve real and substan-
tial rights and responsibilities to representatives of fishing
industry organizations or groups of harvesters to achieve
sustainable resource management. Moreover, devolution of rights
is generally not successful without collective action.

For collective action to succeed, governments and fishers
should meet to discuss problems and their possible solutions
and to develop arrangements for management. Fishers should be
asked to express their concerns and ideas and be given an
opportunity to develop their own organizations, networks, and
coalitions.The government’s role is to provide legitimacy and
accountability for local organizations and help develop collective
action institutions such as community-based and co-management
organizations. Successful long-standing arrangements for marine
fishery co-management, such as in Japan and Norway, all have a
legal foundation.

Where authorities do not devolve some of their powers,
governments can abuse co-management arrangements to extend
control where it was previously absent. Government agencies
need to supplement department staffing with new professional
skills and develop capacity to deal with co-management
processes in several communities simultaneously. Such changes
may require reorienting mindsets both in government organiza-
tions and in communities.

THE CHALLENGES AHEAD  

Despite progress in achieving collective action and co-manage-
ment for fisheries, a number of challenges remain:

• Developing co-management institutions on a larger scale
Many of the problems and issues facing fisheries can be solved
only on provincial, national, or even international levels. Fishery

resources are generally too large to be entirely within the
control of a few communities. In these cases it is imperative to
provide for representation of fishery groups at different levels.

• Reconciling local and global agendas 
Often international agreements on fisheries and local environ-
mental management contradict each other.The government
needs to meet its double obligation of attending to international
agreements while sharing decisionmaking power for fisheries
management with communities.

• Identifying a management knowledge base acceptable to stakeholders
To maintain scientific validity and achieve wide acceptance, co-
management systems need to reconcile both formal scientific
knowledge and fishers’ knowledge. One approach may be to
identify science-based indicators of the status of the resource
system that also reflect fishers’ observations.

• Developing approaches to manage conflicts
Management arrangements may require access rights to be
limited to some resource users and to exclude others, often
resulting in conflicts. Participatory approaches for managing such
conflicts are crucial for successful co-management.

• Reforming existing institutions to empower local communities to
participate in determining management objectives
This step may require substantial changes in governmental
fisheries management agencies and in stakeholders’ perceptions
of their respective roles.

These issues must be addressed in practical experiments
with collective action and co-management.The results need to
be documented and the experiences communicated to others
who may be in the process of establishing or developing collec-
tive action capacity among fishers. ■

For further reading see M.Ahmed,A. D. Capistrano, and M.
Hossain,“Experiences of Partnership Models for the Co-
Management of Bangladesh Fisheries,” Fisheries Management
and Ecology 4 (3): 233–248; B. Katon, R. S. Pomeroy, and A.
Salamanca,“The Marine Conservation Project for San
Salvador:A Case Study of Fisheries Co-Management in the
Philippines,” Working Paper No. 23 (Manila: International
Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, 1997); K.
Kuperan Viswanathan and M.Ahmed,“Communities and
Institutions for Common Property,” Fisheries Co-Management
News, No. 10 (Penang, Malaysia:WorldFish Center, 2002); G.T.
Silvestre, Integrated Management of Coastal Fisheries: Lessons
from Initiatives in San Miguel Bay, Philippines (Manila:
International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management,
1996); and K. Kuperan Viswanathan, J. Raakjaer Nielsen, P.
Degnbol, M.Ahmed, M. Hara, and N. Mustapha Raja Abdullah,
“Fisheries Co-Management—Findings from a Worldwide Study:
A Policy Brief” (Manila:WorldFish Center, 2003).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



