



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 8 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Collaborative Management of Forests
EVA WOLLENBERG, BRUCE CAMPBELL, SHEONA SHACKLETON, DAVID EDMUNDS, AND

PATRICIA SHANLEY

Governments around the world increasingly seek tomanage their forests with the collaboration of the people
living nearby. Ministries of forestry or their equivalents usually
do this by offering local people access to selected forest
products or forest land, income from forest resources, or
opportunities for communicating with government forestry
officials. In return, the agency obliges local people to cooperate
in managing the forests around them by protecting existing
forest or by planting trees. Governments claim that the
programs devolve control over forests to local people and
provide more secure livelihoods, as well as help maintain and
regenerate forests. By sharing rights among local groups and
the state, the programs also help to reconcile the resource
claims of local people with those of the national government.
Everybody supposedly wins.

Millions of the rural poor now participate in collaborative
forest management schemes under a variety of tenurial and
organizational arrangements.We examine those arrangements
and ask whether local people have indeed gained more access
to benefits from and control over forests. Our findings suggest
that most co-management projects actually maintain and even
extend central government control.Where communities had
already managed forests in Orissa and Uttarakhand in India, the
government required that they share their incomes with the
state forest department. Governments in many countries
typically predetermine which species can be planted in refor-
estation or agroforestry schemes and what types of organiza-
tions can be given rights to manage forests.Whereas local
people have gained greater legal access to forests and some
might have increased their incomes, many have also lost out.
For example, game areas and plantations have been frequently
established on land used by poorer members of communities
for grazing or cultivation. Local people have also not shown a
consistent interest in forest management.

THE COLLABORATIVE MANAGEMENT MODEL

Collaborative management or “co-management” forest
programs have had a huge impact. In India, more than 63,000
groups have enrolled in joint forest management programs to
regenerate 14 million hectares. In Nepal, 9,000 forest user
groups are trying to regenerate 700,000 hectares of forest. In
Brazil, farmers help to manage 2.2 million hectares as extrac-
tive reserves. Half the districts in Zimbabwe participate in
CAMPFIRE schemes, in which local communities can share
revenues gained from tourist use of wildlife areas.These
programs have generally helped to protect forests and improve
access rights of the rural poor to forest resources but have
often fallen short of their potential to significantly improve the
livelihoods of the poor.

Collective action has been a key feature of organizational

arrangements for co-management.These arrangements have
included (1) corporate, legal organizations of rights holders such
as rubber tappers’ organizations in Brazil, ejidos in Mexico, or
trusts in Botswana; (2) village committees facilitated by govern-
ment departments such as Forest Protection Committees in
India; (3) local government organizations such as Rural District
Councils in Zimbabwe; and (4) multi-stakeholder district struc-
tures aligned to line departments such as the Wildlife
Management Authorities in Zambia. Collective action assists in
co-management by reducing the number of people that forest
agencies must deal with and by bringing together different
groups to play complementary roles in forest management. Even
when governments contract directly with households or individ-
uals, community organizations usually help with the programs, as
in the case of Integrated Social Forestry in the Philippines.

STATE CONTROL 

The organizational arrangements for co-management strongly
influence how much government agencies can control forest
management and outcomes for local people. Forestry agencies
exert more control over decisions about species selection,
harvesting practices, sales, consumption, and the distribution of
benefits where they have devolved management to local govern-
ments or larger-scale organizations. In such cases, the agency’s
interests in timber production, revenue generation, and environ-
mental conservation have often overridden villagers’ interests in
livelihoods.

Forestry agencies exercise control over individuals and
village groups as well by making local organizations accountable
to the agencies rather than to local stakeholders.The agencies
use standardized contractual agreements and regulations that
limit local people’s self-determination. Local people who
organize collectively are better able to mobilize resources and
negotiate for desired benefits.They are able to exert more
influence when they have the direct support of nongovern-
mental organizations (NGOs), donors, federations, and other
external actors. Collective action, both within communities and
together with outside groups, thus helps local people become
more influential stakeholders in co-management arrangements.
Where local groups have managed their own forests without
state intervention, however, they have not necessarily been
better off.Without government support, they often have had
difficulty implementing or enforcing their decisions.

ADDRESSING POVERTY 

Collaborative management has improved formal access to
forests for rural people. Harvesting forest resources helps them
meet subsistence needs and offers a safety net in times of
shortage.Yet local people’s rights to valuable commercial
products such as timber or game remain restricted.Where

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



