



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Eva Wollenberg (l.wollenberg@cgiar.org) is a scientist at the Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) in Bogor, Indonesia; Bruce Campbell
(b.campbell@cgiar.org) is the director of the Livelihoods Programme at CIFOR; Sheona Shackleton (shackleton@.ru.ac.za) is a research associate at Rhodes
University in Grahamstown South Africa; David Edmunds (edmundsdavid@lycos.com) is a lecturer at the University of California, Santa Cruz, and a research
associate at CIFOR; Patricia Shanley (p.shanley@cgiar.org) is a scientist at CIFOR.

forests yield financial benefits, governments often fail to deliver
local people’s promised share of incomes or deliver them
primarily to local elites. For the poor to benefit substantially
from forest access, they need more secure property rights over
valuable resources. Only rarely have poor communities received
substantial financial benefits, such as in Botswana where 45
families shared about US$125,000 annually from the Chobe
Trust.

Focusing too narrowly on organizing collective action
around managing a single resource such as a forest may divert
potentially productive efforts. Converting forests to agriculture
or other uses or initiating land reform may bring local people
greater economic benefits in many areas. Forest co-management
programs are not sufficient to address poverty.

ORGANIZING COLLECTIVE ACTION: CHALLENGES
FOR THE FUTURE

Co-management has revealed the difficulty of dividing roles,
rights, and responsibilities, especially where the groups involved
have highly divergent interests. Forest agencies have had varying
experiences in organizing collective action. Romantic ideals
about harmonious communities and the local knowledge and
capacities of “traditional peoples” have been counterbalanced by
internal conflict and lack of leadership in many communities and
the difficulty of organizing collective action where local social
capital is weak. Increasing competition and fragmentation of
forests have led to more de facto privatization of land, making it
difficult for communities to organize together around a common
resource. Many co-management efforts rely on outside agents to
facilitate collective action, but sustaining that action has proved
difficult. Other stakeholders, such as local governments or
NGOs, often create their own sets of incentives or pressures
for local people that work against co-management initiatives.

Forest co-management has created a useful institutional
entry point. It now seems time to build more actively on the
lessons learned. State officials and local people have had
different expectations about the process and goals of co-
management. Forest departments have controlled the terms of
co-management and been reluctant to share their benefits.
People in forest areas now must achieve the rights and power
to bring about a fair division of control, responsibility, and
benefits between themselves and the government.

Checks and balances need to be in place to ensure that
local elites or other groups do not monopolize benefits and
decisionmaking.The process should acknowledge the multiple
interests among different groups and give special attention to
the livelihood needs of the poor. Initiatives need to build

better on existing management practices and enhance local
livelihood options.

The current bureaucratic approaches to co-management
do not address the complexity of these different needs.
Frameworks for natural resource management that are
developed locally by stakeholders and then linked to national
objectives are more flexible and responsive to local interests.
In the past it has been difficult for large centralized forest
agencies to accommodate local interests, and local groups have
had little voice in agency decisionmaking.This is changing as
governments decentralize and as the role of NGOs increases.
Choosing the right facilitators and settings for these negotia-
tions is critical for ensuring that the interests of the poor are
met. Experience suggests that local responsiveness will be
higher when institutional arrangements facilitate good commu-
nication and learning among stakeholders.The learning process
should include both local interest groups and national policy-
makers to reflect different interests.Where forestry incomes
are limited and less attractive than incomes from other
sustainable land uses and other activities, the rural poor should
be encouraged to pursue economic options other than
forestry to better meet their needs.

Triggered by past experiences and by the increasing
complexity of demands from different interest groups, the co-
management paradigm is shifting. Management increasingly
involves not just a local group and the government, but a range
of stakeholders, and acknowledges overlapping systems of
management and diverse interests.The actors involved have
recognized that more emphasis is needed on the institutional
and political aspects of management design.Thus forest
management efforts are focusing on negotiation and on frame-
works that emphasize local people’s right to self-determination
and allow for effective representation of rural poor people in
negotiations.The rural poor and their federations and
advocates are bringing a new sophistication to negotiations and
demanding that their voices be heard. ■

For further reading see J.-M. Baland and J.-P. Platteau, Halting
Degradation of Natural Resources: Is There a Role for Rural
Communities? (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996); J. Ribot,
Democratic Decentralization of Natural Resources
(Washington, DC:World Resources Institute, 2002); S.
Shackleton, B. Campbell, E.Wollenberg, and D. Edmunds,
“Devolution and Community-Based Natural Resource
Management: Creating Space for Local People to Participate
and Benefit,” Natural Resource Perspective (Overseas
Development Institute), No. 76, 2002.

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



