



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 9 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Institutional Options for Managing Rangelands
TIDIANE NGAIDO AND NANCY MCCARTHY

Garret Hardin’s “tragedy of the commons” theory uses theexample of rangelands to argue that when many people
have access rights to the same resource, there is a potential
for each individual to overuse and underinvest in the resource.
This theory has prompted a debate over the effectiveness 
of common property resource management, especially for
rangelands.

In reality, rangelands have been subject not just to the
open access situation described by Hardin, but to a wide range
of tenure arrangements, with different structures for regulating
access to, use of, and management of rangelands.These include
many customary and tribal institutional arrangements that have
functioned for long periods. Each of these property rights
regimes and institutional options is associated with different
costs for achieving various goals, such as poverty reduction,
equitable access to resources, and sustainable use and manage-
ment of those resources.This brief considers the benefits and
costs of alternative tenure and institutional arrangements and
the impact of existing legal and policy frameworks on the
sustainability and equity of pastoral production systems under
three categories of landownership: (1) state ownership; (2)
individual ownership; and (3) common property.

STATE OWNERSHIP 
Proponents of state involvement maintain that only an external
authority can enforce the best use of, and investment in,
common pool natural resources.They argue that the state has
greater financial resources with which to make large-scale
investments and can bear the risk associated with such invest-
ments better than community members can. Defining the “best”
use rates and investments, however, requires a good deal of
information on local conditions. In most cases government
agencies responsible for state rangelands have only limited
knowledge of agroecological conditions, and even less under-
standing of local rules of use and management.These informa-
tion problems increase the costs of enforcing management
decisions by government agents. Furthermore, in the arid and
semi-arid regions, flexibility and mobility are valuable strategies
for managing spatial and temporal variation in climate.
Centralized government decisionmaking and enforcement struc-
tures are likely to severely reduce this flexibility. Finally, collective
action is likely to be lower under state tenure because pastoral-
ists may fear that claims on returns to investments they make
now on state land will not be recognized in the future.

Nonetheless, a number of different institutional arrange-
ments have been introduced to manage some of these costs,
including the granting of common use rights to communities or
cooperatives, grazing licenses, and leaseholds.

COMMON USE RIGHTS FOR PASTORAL
COMMUNITIES

Some governments provide tacit recognition of pastoral commu-
nities’ use rights and their potential for informally operating
grazing networks.This tacit recognition, however, gives pastoral-
ists only a limited role in management and investment decisions
and an even smaller role in deciding on the evolution of
property rights. Often users do not have the right to reallocate
common land to alternative activities like cropping or reserves, a
situation that limits the capacity of pastoralists to respond to
local conditions. By appropriating pastoral resources and limiting
the role of local-level pastoral institutions, state ownership has
often fostered land use conflicts and the breakdown of collective
action within and across pastoral groups. In particular, where the
state claimed ownership but expended limited resources to
manage rangelands or relied on bureaucrats to implement
management schemes without knowledge of local resources and
institutions, many land use conflicts have arisen and resources
have become degraded.

COMMON USE RIGHTS FOR PASTORAL
ORGANIZATIONS

Numerous projects have attempted to reorganize pastoralists
into cooperatives with the aim of improving rangeland resources
and promoting collective action, but the cooperatives have rarely
been effective managers of rangelands. In theory, the state and
the local organizations could work together to create and
enforce use rules and investment activities, but in practice the
costs of negotiating such rules have often been prohibitive. In
most West Asian countries pastoral cooperatives have mainly
been involved in distributing subsidized feeds. In Jordan, however,
the new herder-driven cooperatives, which have management
rights granted by the state on their traditional pastures, are
getting better range productivity results than state-managed
reserves, without requiring expensive fencing and guarding.This
type of cooperative fosters collective action between members
because members are certain to reap the benefits of their
investments and control access to improved pastures.There
remain, however, concerns about potential conflicts between
cooperative members and nonmembers. In the Sahel, most of
the pastures exclusively used by members of pastoral organiza-
tions reverted to common pastures open to all community
members at the end of the projects.

GRAZING LICENSES

As part of a strategy designed primarily to reverse rangeland
degradation, government-managed grazing reserves grant grazing
licenses. In the best-case scenario, the government has a well-
defined and well-funded investment strategy. Grazing reserves

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



