



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) is one of several international research centers
supported by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). “A 2020 Vision for
Food,Agriculture, and the Environment” is an initiative of IFPRI® to develop a shared vision and consensus
for action on how to meet future world food needs while reducing poverty and protecting the environment.This
set of Focus briefs presents technical research results that encompass a wide range of subjects drawn from
research on policy-relevant aspects of agriculture, poverty, nutrition, and the environment. It contains materials
that IFPRI believes are of key interest to those involved in addressing emerging food and development problems.
The 2020 Vision Initiative gratefully acknowledges support from the following donors: Canadian International
Development Agency; Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA); and Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA).

The System-Wide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights (CAPRi), one of several
intercenter initiatives of the CGIAR, fosters research and promotes collaboration on institutional aspects of
natural resource management between the CGIAR centers and National Agricultural Research Institutes. CAPRi
intends to contribute to policies and practices that alleviate rural poverty by analyzing and disseminating
knowledge on the ways that collective action and property rights institutions influence the efficiency, equity, and
sustainability of natural resource use.

The views expressed in these Focus briefs are those of the author(s) and are not necessarily endorsed by or representative of IFPRI or of the
cosponsoring or supporting organizations.

Introduction

Millions of rural poor people in developing countries depend on natural resources—farmland
and rangeland, fishing waters, forests—for their livelihoods. But whether they can use these
resources sustainably to climb out of poverty often depends on the institutions that govern
resource use—property rights and collective action. A multiplicity of property rights and col-
lective action arrangements exist around the globe, and researchers have learned numerous
lessons about what kinds of arrangements work best under what conditions. Making property
rights and collective action work for the poor is not as simple as issuing new land titles or
mindlessly applying standards that have worked elsewhere. Instead, it requires a detailed
understanding of local resource conditions and social relationships, among other factors.

This collection of briefs draws on a wide body of research conducted through the System-
wide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights (CAPRi) of the Consultative Group
on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). It describes the complex issues surrounding
property rights and collective action that policymakers and development professionals must
understand and address if they are to successfully promote sustainable and pro-poor manage-
ment of natural resources. We are grateful to editors Ruth Meinzen-Dick and Monica Di
Gregorio, as well as all of the contributors, for their insights on this crucial topic.

Joachim von Braun Rajul Pandya-Lorch
Director General Head, 2020 Vision Initiative



