



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Tidiane Ngaido (t.ngaido@cgiar.org) and Nancy McCarthy (n.mccarthy@cgiar.org) are both research fellows in the Environment and Production Technology
Division at IFPRI.

are then opened for grazing during specific periods of the year,
and any herder can buy a license, whether or not he or she is a
member of the tribe or community that held traditional claim to
the reserve area. Pastoral communities contribute little to the
management of these reserves, and the main collective action of
community members has often been to hinder state licensing
policies. In Jordan and Syria, this situation has often led to
conflicts between local and nonlocal herd owners.The approach
has also been widely criticized because of the high costs of
fencing and guarding reserves and the lack of community partici-
pation in improving and managing these reserves.

INDIVIDUAL LEASEHOLDS

The practice of granting long-term individual leaseholds on
range resources remains limited. In Botswana, leaseholds have
in some cases led to increased livestock production and
improved rangeland conditions, but the policy has been
strongly criticized on equity grounds. In many cases, people
with previous claims to resources have been dispossessed or
denied further access without compensation.This situation has
led to additional pressures on the now smaller common pool
resource base, increasing range degradation and leading to
conflicts between large and small herd owners.Widespread
individual leaseholds increase the vulnerability of pastoral
communities during droughts by limiting their capacity to move
and negotiate access to neighboring pastures.There is very
little collective action under this system.

In summary, state ownership often does not promote
community stewardship and thus limits collective action and
incentives for members to manage their resources effectively
and make long-term investments. Competing claims between
pastoral communities and states has created situations of
confusion and open access, leading many pastoralists to
challenge both state and traditional range management rules
and activities and in some cases to illegally appropriate
common rangelands.

INDIVIDUAL OWNERSHIP  

In pastoral areas of central Tunisia, individual private property
rights fostered the transformation of pastoral and nomadic
systems into agropastoralist systems. Privatization led to the
wide-scale adoption of fodder crop production, including cacti
and shrubs.The efficiency of this option, however, depends on
the performance of land, purchased input, credit and output
markets, and legal and institutional provisions to reduce land
fragmentation. Obviously, there is potential for misappropria-
tion of land by the politically powerful, and equity issues are
thus of utmost concern.Also, such a system is likely to reduce
herd size, mobility, and collective action within and between
pastoral groups, and consequently pastoralist households may
become more vulnerable to drought.

COMMON PROPERTY

Common property rights for communities make tenure more
secure, but the communities must bear all costs of making, moni-
toring, and enforcing rules regarding rangeland management.
Managing access to and use of resources can be difficult, particu-
larly when benefits and costs are not equally distributed among
community members. Common property rights are generally
granted to a fixed and well-defined group for rangelands with well-
defined boundaries, thereby limiting flexibility and herd mobility.

Nonetheless, under community ownership, local institutions
may keep their traditional roles of managing the resources,
deciding how to allocate resources between pastures and
croplands, and deciding on the nature of the rights to be
allocated to members and nonmembers.These opportunities
may empower local institutions and provide them with the
capacity to mobilize collection action and sustain the livelihoods
of their communities.

Because landowning communities may have difficulties mobi-
lizing financial resources and technical expertise, they may enter
contractual arrangements for improving their resources. Under
such contracts, as in central Tunisia and Morocco, state institu-
tions, generally forest services, are entrusted with the responsi-
bility for improving and managing the resource. After the
improvement of the resource, rights holders purchase grazing or
cutting licenses, and the revenues generated from the licenses are
used to pay off improvement costs.Theoretically, these ranges will
revert to communities once improvement costs are recuperated;
in practice, however, such transfers have often not taken place.

CONCLUSIONS

Achieving efficient, equitable, and sustainable rangeland manage-
ment depends on the costs and benefits of alternative systems.
These costs and benefits, in turn, depend on agroecological, socio-
cultural, and economic characteristics.The conservation and
management of rangelands require not only tenure security, but
also an understanding of local livestock production and risk
management strategies and factors that promote collective
action, which can then be integrated into national policy formu-
lation strategies and project designs. ■

For further reading see T. Ngaido,“Pastoral Land Rights,”
paper prepared for the World Bank's Regional Workshop on
Land Issues in Africa, Kampala, Uganda,April 2002,
http://lnweb18.worldbank.org/ESSD/ardext.nsf/24ByDocName/
PapersPastoral/$FILE/Pastoral+Land+Rights_Ngaido.pdf;T.
Ngaido, N. McCarthy, and M. Di Gregorio,“International
Conference on Policy and Institutional Options for the
Management of Rangelands in Dry Areas:Workshop Summary
Paper,” CAPRi Working Paper 23 (Washington, DC: IFPRI,
2002), http://www.capri.cgiar.org/wp/capriwp23.asp; N.
McCarthy, B. Swallow, M. Kirk, and P. Hazell, Property Rights,
Risk, and Livestock Development in Africa (Washington, DC:
IFPRI, 2000), http://www.capri.cgiar.org/proprights.asp.

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



