



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 10 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Property Rights, Collective Action, and Plant Genetic Resources
PABLO EYZAGUIRRE, NANCY MCCARTHY, MONICA DI GREGORIO, AND EVAN DENNIS

Genetic resources are the genetic material in plants andanimals that determine useful traits that people can
conserve, characterize, evaluate, and use to meet their needs.
These resources are not simply the genes encoded in DNA,
but particular expressions of the genes that farmers, scientists,
and plant breeders have recognized and selected. Research has
estimated that the value of increases in crop yields derived
from new genes and genetic modification since 1945 has
amounted to about US$115 billion a year worldwide.

Conservation of genetic resources contributes to plant
genetic diversity, which includes both the combination of
species that constitutes an ecosystem (genetic diversity across
species), as well as the number of different varieties within a
species. Development agencies, researchers, and policymakers
are growing increasingly concerned about the consequences of
the current erosion of genetic diversity.The 1997 FAO (Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) synthesis
of around 150 country reports states that nearly all countries
report that crop genetic erosion is taking place and that it is a
serious problem. Loss of biodiversity in cultivated and wild
species can increase plants’ vulnerability to insect pests and
diseases, worsen nutrition through declines in the variety of
foods available, reduce the capacity of plant resources to adapt
to changing conditions, and lead to loss of local knowledge
about diversity.These effects can in turn reduce food security,
threaten the sustainability of agricultural production systems,
and jeopardize the livelihoods of rural communities today and
for generations to come.

Many factors affect the conservation of biodiversity,
including demographic changes, technological developments,
national agricultural policies, and economic, social, and cultural
factors. Institutional aspects related to property rights and
collective action play a key role in local plant genetic conserva-
tion outcomes.

PROPERTY RIGHTS TO LAND-BASED RESOURCES

Land and water are crucial “partner resources” needed for the
conservation of genetic resources. In particular land tenure
and water rights are likely to affect in situ conservation (that
is, conservation in natural surroundings, where plants have
developed their distinctive properties) for a variety of reasons:

•  The type and strength of property rights arrangements
affect farmers’ time horizon and investment choices and,
as a consequence, crop diversity.

•  Stronger land use and management rights for farmers can
increase their ability to grow a variety of crops.Where
farmers’ investments are crop specific, however, security
of property rights might lead to less-diversified cropping
patterns.

•  Property rights, together with available genetic resources,
affect people’s capacity to manage variability and risk.
Many traditional communities present “patchwork land-
scapes” with various ecological niches that favor the use
of unique varieties and plant types adapted to those
niches. High genetic diversity reduces risk, and access to a
diverse pool of plant genetic resources improves the long-
term resilience of the agricultural production system in
the face of adverse shocks like drought.

Formal property rights (“laws on the books”) often coexist
with and differ from locally exercised property rights.The
existence of different overlapping arrangements and regulatory
frameworks (legal pluralism) must be taken into account in
order to assess their effects on biodiversity conservation. For
example, in Ethiopia sacred groves managed by the Christian
Coptic churches not only provide landless people with access to
nontimber forest products, but also assure protection to areas
with some of the highest amounts of biodiversity in the country.

Different property rights regimes have different advantages
and disadvantages for biodiversity conservation. For example,
local forest and pasture resources held as common property
enable farmers to avail themselves of a much wider range of
resources than they could if all land were cultivated. In Kenya
the plant Amaranthus graecizans L. is collected from the wild in
communal areas along roadsides and rivers, but it is not culti-
vated in gardens. Common property rights provide landless
poor with access and foster local conservation of this unique
genetic resource. Often when access to communal areas is
restricted, not only are livelihoods affected, but also species lose
their value as the traditions associated with them disappear.

State imposition of new property rights regimes that fail to
account for traditional rights can also affect the maintenance of
local knowledge of specific varieties. For example, in 1975 a
forest ecosystem in Uzbekistan was converted to a protected
nature reserve.As a consequence the surrounding communities
lost access rights to this land, which contains a wild plant species
that had been used locally to cure heart ailments. Having lost
access to this wild species, the local people over time lost the
knowledge of the heart-improving properties of this plant, and
with that, a low-cost health remedy.

THE ROLE OF COLLECTIVE ACTION 

Whereas state provision can often sustain ex situ conservation
(collection and storage of genetic resources to ensure avail-
ability in the future), in situ conservation requires coordination
by farmers and other actors. Both formal and informal
networks can work to increase access to diversity and avail-
ability of genetic variation, or they can work in conflicting
ways, thus reducing diversity. In marginalized and remote areas
where farmers’ own seed systems continue to play a major

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



