



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Pablo Eyzaguirre (p.eyzaguirre@cgiar.org) is a senior scientist and Evan Dennis (e.dennis@cgiar.org) is a consultant at the International Plant Genetic
Resources Institute in Rome, Italy; Nancy McCarthy (n.mccarthy@cgiar.org) is a research fellow and Monica Di Gregorio (m.digregorio@cgiar.org) is a
research analyst for the CAPRi Program and the Environment and Production Technology Division at IFPRI.

role in meeting farmers’ heterogeneous needs for seed supply,
collective action is especially important.

Germplasm information is composed of both scientific and
local knowledge. Because the state is often ineffective at
acquiring, documenting, and retaining local knowledge, collec-
tive action can provide the means to facilitate the maintenance
of local knowledge. Farmers’ organizations for seed manage-
ment, local seed exchange networks, and seed fairs increase
the information available about plant genetic resources,
contribute to local capacity to conserve local crop varieties,
and increase the possibilities for improving local varieties.

Finally, a group of farmers should be able to maintain more
diversity with a higher chance of accessing new populations
and a lower probability of loss of populations than any indi-
vidual. Strengthening local capacity to undertake collective
action may thus allow farmers and communities to maintain
greater genetic resource diversity.

FARMERS’ AND INDIGENOUS RIGHTS TO 
GENETIC RESOURCES

Local conservation efforts are also affected by international
policies guiding the development of intellectual property rights
for genetic resources. Intellectual property rights, like all other
property rights, provide the rights to the stream of benefits
(including income) from the resource in question.Article 8(j)
of the Convention on Biological Diversity affirms the rights of
local indigenous communities to access and benefit from local
genetic resources.The recently signed International Treaty on
Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture also affects
local rights.

Tracing the contribution of conservation practices to
germplasm development is difficult, a situation that complicates
the assignment of intellectual property rights and affects the
equity of outcomes:

•  Who is eligible to claim rights over a specific type of seed? 

•  When can innovation in genetic resources be considered
the product of an individual or a firm, and when is it a
product of a collective effort by many individuals? 

•  If many individuals are involved, is it possible and effective
to define and assign collective rights to plant genetic
resources?

Although society has paid significant attention to the private
actions and ownership (mainly by firms) that underpin genetic
resource innovation using biotechnology, it has paid less attention
to property rights of agrarian communities and cultures for
whom genetic resources are essential livelihood assets.

In the case of biotechnology, genetic resource innovations
are treated as individual property. On the other hand, farming
communities use genetic resources to meet a variety of liveli-

hood, environmental, and cultural needs, and innovations in
genetic resources over time are often the product of long-
term collective efforts, such that no single individual can claim
to be owner or originator of the innovation process and the
resulting genetic resources.

The rules assigning property rights over genetic resources
to individuals or groups of users will affect people’s livelihoods.
One risk of failing to recognize local indigenous rights is that
external actors might appropriate exclusive rights over genetic
resources they did not, in fact,“innovate.”

Given the neglect of property rights of agrarian communities
and cultures, collective action can help empower farmers to
demand that government bodies guarantee rights to local genetic
diversity to farmers.The other side of the coin is that collective
action can also be used to limit use of germplasm by others,
thereby worsening access and benefits to society as a whole.

RISKS AND PROBLEMS OF EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY
RIGHTS TO GENETIC RESOURCES

Even if local indigenous groups have legally recognized rights to
genetic resources, privatization itself (or the assignment of
exclusive rights) can lead to reduced availability of germplasm.
In particular, assigning exclusive property rights to germplasm
might reduce access to plant genetic material for everyone,
and particularly for poorer farmers, given that often less-
informed, less-educated, and marginalized rural populations are
at a disadvantage in claiming ownership

Policymakers should be aware of the links between
property rights, collective action, and local conservation of
local plant genetic diversity. It is important to take into
account local regulatory frameworks as well as the existence
and overlap of multiple legal systems, try to build on these, and
avoid policies that might in fact reduce access to genetic
diversity for local populations, in order to avoid eroding
genetic diversity and increasing the vulnerability of the poor. ■

For further reading see S. Brush, ed., Genes in the Field: On-
Farm Conservation of Crop Diversity (Ottawa, Canada:
International Development Research Centre, 2000);
International Potato Center (CIP)–Users’ Perspectives with
Agricultural Research and Development (UPWARD),
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Agricultural Biodiversity
(Manila, 2003), http://www.eseap.cipotato.org/upward/Abstract
/Agrobio-sourcebook.htm; FAO, The State of the World’s Plant
Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (Rome, 1997),
http://www.fao.org/WAICENT/FaoInfo/Agricult/AGP/AGPS/pg
rfa/pdf/swrfull.pdf; J.W.Watson, and P. B. Eyzaguirre, eds.,
Proceedings of the Second International Home Gardens
Workshop: Contribution of Home Gardens to In Situ
Conservation of Plant Genetic Resources in Farming Systems,
17–19 July 2001,Witzenhausen, Germany (Rome: IPGRI, 2002),
http://www.ipgri.cgiar.org/publications/pdf/753.pdf.

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



