



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 11 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Collective Action in Pest Management
HELLE MUNK RAVNBORG

Every year, crop and animal pests deprive farmers of signifi-cant parts of their production. Some estimates suggest
that 10–40 percent of the world’s gross agricultural production
is destroyed by agricultural pests.These pests include a huge
variety of different organisms—not only insects, mites, worms,
rodents, and birds, but also, in a broader sense, all harmful
organisms such as fungi, bacteria, viruses and virus-like
organisms, and weeds. The variety of pests and their interac-
tions with other ecosystem conditions make pest problems
very diverse and often complex, so solutions to single pest
problems must vary substantially. Some pests can be controlled
by individual farmers; others are amenable to public programs
like aerial spraying. Many pest management approaches,
however, call for neighbors to work together.

In the 1970s and 1980s the rapid spread of the cassava
mealy bug in Sub-Saharan Africa cut into cassava production
and nearly created a major famine in many areas. Researchers
from the Consultative Group on International Agricultural
Research (CGIAR) succeeded in identifying and mass breeding
a natural predator of the cassava mealy bug—a parasitic wasp
from Paraguay—that was released by airplane over the entire
cassava-growing belt. By the early 1990s the wasps had spread
to a point where a state of ecological balance between the
cassava mealy bug and its predator had been created
throughout Sub-Saharan Africa. Neither extension, additional
investment, or any other action by the farmers was needed.
Once released from the airplane, the wasps reproduced and
dispersed themselves. But in most cases, technical solutions 
to pest problems do not have wings of their own and are not
implemented that easily.The remainder of this brief focuses on
cases where technical solutions alone are not sufficient and 
the collaboration of farmers is crucial for successful pest
management.

FARMER COLLABORATION FOR PEST 
MANAGEMENT

Leaf-cutting ants are a serious problem for farmers in many
parts of Latin America.These ants are capable of destroying 
an entire cassava plot or one or more fruit trees overnight.
There are simple technical options for controlling the ants,
such as the regular pumping of insecticide into the anthill.
Ants, however, do not respect farm boundaries. Farmers who
control anthills on their own fields might still face damage to
their crops caused by ants coming from neighboring fields
where no control measures are taken.

Actions by individual farmers acting alone in cases like
these can also raise new problems.The extensive use of pesti-
cides on some farms may drive pests to fields of others or
cause the pests to develop localized resistance to pesticides.

Likewise, if farmers use pesticides that kill not only the pests
but also their enemies, neighboring farmers who introduce or
encourage the presence of predators may find that their
predator populations never reach a viable size.

Often, the best results occur when the majority of
farmers in an area adopt integrated pest management
practices, such as combining occasional use of pesticides with
crop rotation or intercropping of different crops or varieties.
Convincing neighboring farmers to adopt such practices in a
coordinated fashion is thus key to success.This need is espe-
cially great when the integrated approach involves allowing
some crop losses to achieve greater overall profits, as well as
to reduce environmental pollution and health hazards from
heavy pesticide use.

In such cases, successful pest management has both a
spatial and a temporal dimension. First, it depends upon being
implemented in a coordinated fashion over a wide geographic
area.Thus pest management is more effective if required insti-
tutions are in place to stimulate and facilitate coordinated or
collective management efforts. Second, although in some cases
a pest is controlled once and for all over a short time, in other
cases pest management is a continuous effort that requires
sustained collective action.This commitment in turn requires a
certain degree of stability in the group undertaking the coordi-
nated pest management. Under certain conditions secure
property rights might contribute to ensure such stability, but
they are no guarantee. Many other factors contribute to
farmers’ decisions about whether to continue farming in an
area, such as the existence of alternative livelihood options in
and outside the area, a sense of belonging to an area, and local
cultural and social settings.

GAINING FARMERS’ SUPPORT FOR 
COLLABORATION 

Perhaps the biggest obstacle to coordinated pest management
is the view of farmers as sovereign decisionmakers. In many
places, farmers are reluctant to interfere with the farming
practices of others because this action might be perceived as a
reproach and thus endanger future relationships and perhaps
block future favors.A key challenge therefore is to create insti-
tutions through which to encourage neighboring farmers to
participate in coordinated pest management so that the indi-
vidual farmer does not need to approach his or her neighbors.

It is essential that farmers jointly recognize the trans-
boundary nature of pest management problems, because this
recognition helps to legitimize the otherwise socially unaccept-
able interference with the farming practices of others. In the
case of ant control in Colombia, a joint community map of the
location of anthills and their potential radius of crop damage,

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



