



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Helle Munk Ravnborg (hmr@diis.dk) is a senior researcher at the Danish Institute for International Studies (DIIS) in Copenhagen, Denmark.

superimposed on a map of farm boundaries, provided an
important illustration of the transboundary nature of the ant
control problem.With the help of the map and the backing of
external facilitators, farmers could calculate the average
number of anthills affecting each plot and the number of
anthills actually located on plots belonging to other farmers.

In many cases, external support is needed to help system-
atize the biophysical (such as ecological and entomological)
observations and arguments upon which the need for coordi-
nated pest management is based. Institutions such as farmer
field schools or an agricultural extension service might be
feasible options for providing this external support.

Another important element that helps persuade farmers
to participate in coordinated pest management is the avail-
ability of low-cost, economically feasible technical options for
control.Which options are considered low cost and economi-
cally feasible obviously depends upon the context—that is, the
potential damage caused by the pest as well as the resources
available to the individual farmer. Generally speaking, the more
widespread and severe the damage caused by pest problems
and the less demanding and costly the technical control option,
the easier it will be to persuade farmers to participate in coor-
dinated pest management.

Hence, in areas with no previous experience of coordi-
nated pest management, it is wise to begin by embarking on
pest management problems that

•  are widespread (that is, they should affect the majority of
farmers so that a large proportion of farmers will not
decline to participate in the coordinated pest management
effort);

•  are amenable to low-cost management options so that the
poorest farmers are not prevented from participating in the
coordinated pest management effort; and

•  can be dealt with effectively at a relatively limited spatial
scale so that farmers do not become frustrated at having to
coordinate their pest management efforts with distant and
perhaps unknown farmers.

CONCLUSIONS

Because of the transboundary nature of many pest problems,
technical solutions—whether based on the use of pesticides or
on biological principles—are rarely sufficient.To be effective,
such technical solutions need to be implemented in a coordi-
nated fashion among farmers within a given area. Coordination,
however, often represents a major challenge. Even within a
limited geographical area it is likely that farmers are highly
heterogeneous and that multifaceted and often unequal rela-
tionships exist among them.

Why is it advisable, in areas with no previous experience
of coordinated pest management, to start by embarking on
pest management problems that are widespread, have low-cost
solutions, and are of limited spatial scale? First, meeting these
requirements will increase the likelihood that a sufficient
proportion of farmers within an area will be interested and
able to participate in the coordinated pest management
options. Second, under these conditions it is easier for farmers
to mutually monitor compliance with agreed management
practices.Wide and consistent compliance will, in turn, facilitate
the gradual development of trust among neighboring farmers,
which is so important when, as in integrated pest management,
short-term individual gains must be balanced against longer-
term collective interests.

The implications are that extension approaches such as
farmer field schools should (1) promote an understanding of
the spatial dimensions of pest ecology and (2) provide commu-
nication techniques that will enable groups of farmers to
approach neighboring farmers to invite them to take part in
coordinated pest management. ■

For further reading see R. Meinzen-Dick,A. Knox, F. Place,
and B. Swallow, eds., Innovation in Natural Resource
Management:The Role of Property Rights and Collective Action
in Developing Countries (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2002), especially pp. 257–271,“Collective Action in Ant
Control,” by H. M. Ravnborg,A. M. de la Cruz, M. P. Guerrero,
and O.Westermann; J. Pretty, Regenerating Agriculture: Policies
and Practice for Sustainability and Self-Reliance (London:
Earthscan, 1995).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



