



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 12 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Property Rights and Collective Action in Watersheds
BRENT SWALLOW, NANCY JOHNSON,ANNA KNOX, AND RUTH MEINZEN-DICK

WHAT’S SPECIAL ABOUT WATERSHEDS? 

Watersheds define a terrain united by the flow of water,nutrients, pollutants, and sediment.Watersheds also link
foresters, farmers, fishers, and urban dwellers in intricate social
relationships. Both factors—the biophysical attributes and the
policy and institutional environments—shape peoples’ liveli-
hoods and interactions within the watershed.

Watersheds are simultaneously managed at various social
and spatial scales, from community-level catchments to
transnational river systems and lake basins.The flow of water,
soil, nutrients, and other materials across a landscape extends
the consequences of decisions about resource use well beyond
the individual land user or manager.These flows produce both
positive and negative downstream outcomes (or externalities).
Upstream pollution by agricultural chemicals can expose
downstream users to economic and health costs. More posi-
tively, upstream soil erosion can transport fertile soil that can
enrich downstream rice paddies or other fields. Because
watersheds have such broad impacts at so many levels, they
raise special issues for the management of resources through
property rights and collective action.

PROPERTY RIGHTS AND WATERSHEDS  
Despite their complexity and diversity, all watersheds share
two keystone resources: water and land. Property rights to
these two resources are often interrelated, as when rights to
agricultural land are accompanied by presumptive rights to its
surface and groundwater. Often, however, water rights are
more dynamic, flexible, and contested than land rights.

Whereas the supply of land is relatively fixed and certain,
water supplies vary depending on rainfall, hydrologic condi-
tions, and amounts extracted by other users. Economic and
urban development increases demand for water for urban and
industrial use as well as for agriculture.Water users with
conditional, secondary, and insecure rights to water are most
vulnerable to dispossession. Markets may increase the value of
water and economic incentives for its efficient use, but the
more water becomes a commodity, the greater the potential
for dispossession of poor and vulnerable groups.

Property rights to land resources generally vary across the
different types of land that make up watersheds. Insecure
property rights to cropland can reduce incentives to invest in
land improvements and conservation structures such as
terraces or trees that could reduce soil erosion and sediment
flows. Usually more important for watershed management
outcomes are property rights to filters—small areas of land
that help to check, divert, absorb, or stop an undesirable flow
of soil, sediment, or pollutants within a watershed. Some types
of filters, such as rice paddies and contour strips, are man-

made and privately owned and managed, whereas others are
naturally occurring and property can range from private to
communal to public.

Rights to land, water, or other benefits need not be
exclusive to be secure; they can be held in common or overlap
with different resource users. Property rights to common or
public lands such as wetlands, riverbanks, forests, footpaths, and
grazing areas are sometimes insecure and contested. In these
situations, community management, public regulation, or co-
management by communities and local government agencies
may be appropriate to enhance access and operation.

Insecurity or conflict over property rights may encourage
extractive use of resources. Experiences from the Sumber Jaya
catchment area of Indonesia illustrate the problems arising
from ill-defined property rights.The management of upper
watershed areas is still dominated by the state.The Forest
Department manages 70 percent of the land where local
people, classified as illegal squatters, live. Conflict over
property rights generates uncertainty about reaping gains on
investments in conserving resources and instead provides
incentives for farmers to clear primary forest land and adopt
farming practices that generate short-term rather than long-
term returns.

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND WATERSHED 
MANAGEMENT

Effective watershed management requires various stakeholders
to coordinate their use of and investments in these resources.
Robust collective management depends on the level of existing
community organization and social capital. Strong norms and
social relations enable people to work together to achieve
their goals.The size and social structure of communities
sharing the watershed influence their ability to stimulate and
sustain collective action. Smaller groups living closer together
are often more unified than larger, dispersed ones in
supporting effective collective action.

Achieving coordination often requires reconciling socially
defined boundaries like villages with physically defined bound-
aries like catchments.Although there are technical reasons to
use catchments as natural units when applying a watershed
approach to natural resource management, organizing collective
action along strict hydrological boundaries is difficult.
Hydrological features of watersheds or subwatersheds rarely
correspond to the village, the district, or other social or admin-
istrative unit.The best solution to this problem may be to work
within social boundaries, applying a watershed approach.The
“focal area approach” used in Kenya gives preference to social,
rather than hydrological, boundaries, making it easier to
stimulate collective action for managing the resources.

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



