



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Brent Swallow (b.swallow@cgiar.org) is theme leader for environmental services at the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF); Nancy Johnson
(n.johnson@cgiar.org) is a senior scientist at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT); Anna Knox (a.knox@cgiar.org) is a senior research fellow
also at CIAT; and Ruth Meinzen-Dick (r.meinzen-dick@cgiar.org) is a senior research fellow in IFPRI's Environment and Production Technology Division
and coordinator of CAPRi.

Furthermore, the scale at which the physical environment
is optimally managed may not correspond to any one decision-
making body in a community. In that case, collective action
within existing institutions or through the creation of new
institutions becomes critical for managing watershed
resources. Decisionmaking does not have to be embedded in
only one body at one level, but different management responsi-
bilities can be devolved to different bodies.These options vary
according to the size of the watershed, the populations
occupying the watershed, and how the scale and interaction of
resource flows affect people.

STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION IN WATERSHED
MANAGEMENT 

The extensive nature of resources and the interdependency of
users within a watershed underscore the need for broad
stakeholder participation in developing and implementing
watershed management technologies and practices.When
stakeholders do not have an opportunity to participate, the
complexity of local realities and the promise of local solutions
may be overlooked. Recent evidence suggests that participa-
tory watershed development projects are more successful than
externally managed, top-down,“one-size-fits-all” projects.

Achieving effective participation can be challenging
because stakeholders often differ greatly in their social,
economic, and political power and access.There is always the
risk that more powerful stakeholders will negotiate solutions
more beneficial to themselves. Downstream cropland owners
may reap the benefits of improved water and reduced
sediment flows, while less-favored groups, such as women and
pastoralist households, find themselves restricted from grazing
and collecting firewood in riverine areas. Including women and
other less-favored groups in stakeholder consultations could
lead researchers or policymakers to consider alternative land
use and conservation strategies that would minimize negative
impacts on them. Excluding them could undermine the effec-
tiveness of policies if adversely affected groups fail to comply.
Socially optimal resource management calls for collective
action in negotiation, decisionmaking, management, and conflict
resolution among all watershed stakeholders.

Effective democratic forums help provide poor and
marginalized members of the community with a greater voice
in these processes.Where such forums are weak, less enfran-
chised groups may need help in asserting their interests. New
types of organizations that build on but do not duplicate
existing ones and that incorporate more of the stakeholders
with interests in watershed management have a key role to
play in bridging gaps between local community organizations.

External organizations can facilitate, support, and reduce the
costs associated with these multi-stakeholder negotiation
processes.

Stakeholders who participate in watershed management
may also reap the rewards of enhanced human and social
capital. By working closely with researchers, farmers can
strengthen their technical knowledge about agriculture and
natural resource management as well as their analytical capaci-
ties for evaluating different technologies.Working as a group,
they can also improve their organizational capacity.As they gain
the confidence to interact with researchers and extension
agents, participating farmers become empowered to address
their own problems by seeking out appropriate information or
advice. Given the dynamic and long-term nature of watershed
management, empowering local communities to take a leading
role is essential.

Watershed systems are highly complex: resources
frequently have many uses and users; resources and the institu-
tions that manage them span multiple scales; and flows and
movements of water, sediment, nutrients, and other substances
such as pesticide and fertilizer chemicals cause the actions of a
few to have far-reaching effects on many. Interdependencies
and conflicts—latent or overt—are inherent in watershed
management. If manipulated secretly, these interdependencies
can cause suspicion, distrust, and possibly violence and retard
economic progress.When addressed in an open, transparent,
and dynamic manner, these interdependencies can be the foun-
dation of political cooperation, economic development, and
social cohesion. ■

For further reading see Water Policy (Vol. 3, Issue 6),April
2002; D. Grey, Beyond the River:The Benefits of Cooperation on
International Rivers, (Stockholm: International Water
Symposium, 2002); R. Meinzen-Dick and R. Pradhan,“Legal
Pluralism and Dynamic Property Rights,” CAPRi Working
Paper 22 (Washington, DC: IFPRI, 2002),
http://www.capri.cgiar.org/pdf/capriwp22.pdf; and B. R. Bruns
and R. S. Meinzen-Dick, eds., Negotiating Water Rights
(London and New Delhi:Vistaar and ITDG, 2000).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



