



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 13 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Property Rights, Collective Action, and Agribusiness 
NANCY JOHNSON AND JULIO A. BERDEGUÉ

Governments and research and development organizationsare increasingly interested in understanding and
promoting rural agroenterprises as a way to combat rural
poverty.Attention to rural agroenterprises and processes of
agroindustrialization in general are related to two fundamental
global economic tendencies. First, increasing income levels and
demographic changes such as increased female labor force
participation have fueled demand for high-value and processed
products.At the policy level, structural adjustment and liberal-
ization policies have reduced barriers to trade globally and
allowed markets to reach even the most isolated rural areas.
Taken together, these trends are fueling a process of agroindus-
trialization that is transforming agriculture in the developing
world.The changes are most visible in Asia and Latin America,
but Africa is beginning to show similar effects.

Agroindustrialization brings major opportunities but also
many challenges, especially to poor farmers and small agroen-
terprise entrepreneurs. Market forces cannot be denied, but
governments and other organizations must be proactive to
ensure that benefits are socially and economically positive and
equitably distributed.

The agroindustrialization process has three main character-
istics. First, there is the growth in off-farm agriculture-related
activities, such as the supply of farm inputs or the processing,
distribution, and sale of farm products.The suppliers, farmers,
and distributors form supply or product chains.The second
characteristic of agroindustrialization is an increased level of
integration among actors in the supply chain, ranging from loose
coordination to contracting and even subsidiary relationships.
Finally, changes in products, technologies, and market structures
accompany these shifts in number and integration of actors.

IMPLICATIONS OF MARKET ORIENTATION FOR
SMALL-SCALE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS

Market orientation means adjusting production processes and
products to respond to specific consumer demands and market
signals and trends.Although many small farmers in developing
countries will continue to grow subsistence crops, increased
production for the market is the trend in many countries.What
small farmers grow and how they grow it are increasingly deter-
mined by what urban consumers want.Agroindustries are
important economic actors that link producers with consumers.

Agroindustrialization processes are often accompanied and
stimulated by liberalization of economic policy.This reality
means that agroindustries—and the producers supplying
them—must be competitive internationally to survive.To be
competitive, agroindustries typically work only with those
farmers who produce the best-quality products at the lowest
possible cost. Often, the competitiveness of the agroindustry is

strengthened through strict grades and standards, imposed on
their farmer-suppliers through contracts. In negotiating and
enforcing those contracts, power relationships between agroin-
dustries and farmers—especially small and poor farmers—tend
to be highly asymmetric, favoring industry.

Agroindustrialization processes are often accompanied by
privatization of land and other natural resources.The rationale
is to facilitate the development of markets that permit transfers
of assets toward the highest-productivity uses.Typically this
situation has meant a net transfer of productive assets from
small farmers and poor rural communities to commercial
growers and large-scale corporations, both domestic and multi-
national.Where customary rights and communal ownership
were important, the shift to private property may disadvantage
those whose access rights are not recognized under the new
regime.To the extent that these people are more marginalized
in a society, there is the risk of widening existing inequalities.
Similar patterns can be observed with shifts away from tradi-
tional labor exchanges toward wage labor.

Where the costs of accessing markets are high due to
poor infrastructure, inadequate technology, or information
barriers, collective action can help small producers be more
competitive.A study of Associative Peasant Businesses in Chile
found that cooperation benefited producers in markets where
transaction costs were high and where product differentiation
was important. In traditional markets for undifferentiated
crops, no benefits to association were found.Associations were
also found to be good vehicles for introducing new managerial
and farming practices that enhanced farm profitability. Only
about a fifth of these small farmer associations achieved their
objective of helping their members participate in new markets,
despite extensive government support.The reasons for their
many failures included, among others, their inability (1) to
develop and enforce adequate systems of rules to direct
relations among the members and between each of them and
the organization; (2) to establish effective networks with public
and market agents; and (3) to become competitive in the
market in which they operate. Collective action is not a substi-
tute for competitive behavior, but rather a vehicle for it.

IMPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATION FOR SMALL
FARMS AND FIRMS

More striking than the changes in agricultural products and
practices is the integration that has occurred in agroindustry
over the past decade.The rise of mega-processors and retailers
has resulted in very little produce being traded on the open
market.A striking example is the rise of supermarkets in Latin
America, which in a decade moved from 10–20 percent to
50–60 percent of the retail food sector. Collective action can

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



