



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Nancy Johnson (n.johnson@cgiar.org) is a senior scientist with the Centro International de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT) in Cali, Colombia; Julio A. Berdegué
(jberdegue@rimisp.cl) is the president of RIMISP in Santiago, Chile.

sometimes allow producers to rebalance market power relation-
ships and gain bargaining power in negotiations with big buyers.

A driving force behind this integration is the need to coor-
dinate the timing and quality of purchases and deliveries all along
the supply chain. Perishability was behind early integration, but
other factors relating to economies of scale in the management
of information about consumers and their preferences, for
example, reinforced the trend.

In agricultural production, the increasing use of contracts by
processors reflects this integration. Contracting can be positive
for many farmers, but the smallest ones are often bypassed
because the transaction costs associated with managing the
contract outweigh any productivity advantage the small farmer
might offer. Since contracting is characterized by economies of
scale, collective action among farmers, such as producer associ-
ations, can make them competitive in an integrated supply
chain. Collective action among farmers is, however, difficult to
organize, coordinate, and manage.A similar situation faces small
agroenterprises. Even where farms and firms do not operate
under contract, cooperating can help them negotiate better prices
for inputs and outputs, manage crises, or improve local infrastruc-
ture.

Well-organized farmers have competitive advantages, but
collective action at the local level is not likely to be enough to
allow small rural enterprises to fully exploit new market oppor-
tunities.Whether they are acting individually or collectively,
farms and firms need to stay informed about technological and
managerial innovations as well as emerging market opportunities
in broader networks.A growing array of service providers—
formal and informal, public and private—now exists to offer
technical assistance, from quality control to marketing to
financial planning. Firms that identify and take advantage of these
services are more competitive.A study in Colombia found that a
10 percent increase in the number of relationships that an
agroenterprise maintained with other actors was associated
with increases in income per worker of up to 18 percent.This
means that for farms and firms that participate in technically
demanding, information-intensive supply chains, managing their
relationships can be as important as managing their production
processes.

External contacts are important, but internal relationships
are also key to firm performance and survival. Increased
attention to promoting small enterprises is often accompanied
by a push to form and legalize businesses. Decisions about how
businesses should organize themselves are often made on the
basis of legal costs and potential access to government subsidies
for certain types of businesses. Different organizational struc-
tures, however, have fundamental differences that firms need to
consider. Cooperative forms of organization are based on
economic and social objectives and require high levels of
commitment and collective action to function. In practice these
levels of commitment are often hard to maintain, even if the

groups are subsidized. Partnerships have lower legal and admin-
istrative costs, but they assume high levels of trust among the
partners, a condition reflected in the shared, unlimited liability
for the firm’s obligations. Corporations have the highest adminis-
trative costs, but they may be the best structure for firms where
investors do not share high levels of trust and are likely to
change frequently. Evidence from Colombia shows that no one
organizational structure is best for either economic perform-
ance or social impact.The appropriate structure depends on the
individual characteristics and objectives of the members.

CONCLUSIONS

Agroindustrialization is transforming agriculture and rural
communities in developing countries.As a result, farmers and
entrepreneurs need to change the way they do business. Part of
the solution is precisely that: to think about and organize them-
selves as a business and to be more attentive to market signals
and opportunities. Because they are in markets that are not
perfect, investment in collective action and networking can bring
high returns.

The reality of agroindustrialization also means that the
public and private sector research and development organiza-
tions that support agriculture and rural development must
reevaluate how best to support agroenterprise development
through policy, technology, and institutional innovations. High-
value products and opportunities for adding value should
complement the focus on productivity improvement in undiffer-
entiated commodities. Capacity building in business skills, accom-
panied by more and higher-quality business development
services, can improve the competitiveness of small rural busi-
nesses.A better understanding of how to develop and support
networks and innovative forms of organization beyond tradi-
tional agricultural cooperatives is also needed. On a more funda-
mental level, organizational and institutional innovations often
arise in response to high transaction costs associated with
market failures. Ameliorating these market failures, especially in
the area of information and communication, will contribute to a
more efficient and equitable agribusiness sector. ■

For further reading see T. Reardon and J.A. Berdegué,“The
Rapid Rise of Supermarkets in Latin America: Challenges and
Opportunities for Development,” Development Policy Review,
September 2002, 20 (4): 371–388; J.A. Berdegué and G.
Escobar,“Agricultural Knowledge and Information Systems
and Poverty Reduction” AKIS Discussion Paper (Washington,
D.C.:World Bank, 2001), http://lnweb18.worldbank.org/ESSD/
essdext.nsf/26DocByUnid/95644AEDD7FE7F3785256B9E0014
4BAD/$FILE/Akis_and_poverty.pdf; a summary of this paper
was published by the Overseas Development Institute as J.A.
Berdegué and G. Escobar,“Rural Diversity,Agricultural
Innovation Policies, and Poverty Reduction,” AgREN Network
Paper 122 (London: Overseas Development Institute, 2002).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



