



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 14 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Farmer Research and Extension
ANNA KNOX AND NINA LILJA

Local innovation is the key to sustainable improvement in agricultural production, natural resource management, and
rural livelihood systems. One of the main lessons of participa-
tory research is that involving stakeholders in the early stages
of research and development leads to better targeting of tech-
nologies, a greater sense of local ownership, and often more
economically secure livelihoods. Participatory research
approaches have been shown to reduce the time between the
initiation of research and the adoption of new technologies
and to increase both the rate and speed of adoption.The
process of participating in research can also have a significant
impact on farmers’ human and social capital.

Combining technical innovations with collective action
initiatives has been shown to lead to substantial farmer benefits.
A number of farmer-led research and extension (FRE)
approaches incorporate collective action for different purposes
and at different stages in the innovation process. Collective
action can be useful in sharing knowledge, setting priorities, and
experimenting with, evaluating, and disseminating technologies.

Participatory research and collective action tend to
reinforce one another.Where strong norms of collective action
and social capital exist, they create a climate conducive to joint
experimentation and sharing of innovation. Collective action
can be instrumental in motivating participation, coordinating
the actions of multiple resource users, spreading risks,
managing environmental spillovers, and scaling up the benefits
of participatory research.When seeded by external facilitation
and scientific partnership, a carefully nurtured process of
participation also has the potential to strengthen social
networking, cooperation, and organization.

COLLECTIVE ACTION RESEARCH PROGRAMS

Farmers and communities have used a range of FRE approaches
based on collective action.This section describes some of the
most widely applied participatory research approaches.

Farmer field schools (FFSs) emerged in Indonesia in 1986. By
1998 more than 1 million farmers had participated in FFSs in
Indonesia alone, and the method had spread to 12 Asian
countries. It also appeared in many African and Latin American
countries, and the approach continues to spread globally.

The method typically brings together 20–25 farmers from
a community for intensive, field-based learning by doing. It has
been used mainly to train farmers in the principles of inte-
grated pest management (IPM). Collective action in IPM is
critical because reducing pest infestation depends on wide-
spread adoption of the practices. FFS training, tools, and
dynamics aim to build solidarity among participants, thereby
promoting knowledge sharing, experimentation, adoption, and
diffusion. In one Indonesian case, farmers broadened the scope

of the project from targeting a single pest to adopting a more
integrated crop management program for cassava production.
Farmers employing the new method achieved a higher net
income.

Local agriculture research committees (known by their Spanish
acronym, CIALs) provide farmer-led research on crop technolo-
gies to communities. Communities interested in forming a
CIAL elect a small team of community members to undertake
the research.Through partnerships between farmers, extension
workers, and scientists, researchers learn about the farmers’
priorities and filter those up to research organizations to
shape technology development.At the same time, farmers
learn skills in research design and experimentation and gain
access to information on new technologies from the scientists.
Unlike the farmer field schools, CIALs are permanent and
provide ongoing services.The two approaches are increasingly
used to complement each other.

Because CIALs work to bring communities together to
identify research priorities and learn from their results, their
viability depends on large-scale cooperation and support. Joint
experimentation is also fundamental. Collective action helps to
spread both the experimentation risks and the labor burden,
while also enabling more extensive and verifiable experiments.
In Colombia and Honduras, CIALs have formed second-order
organizations to provide credit, organize exchange visits, and
train experienced members to become facilitators who can
organize new CIALs.

Farmer research groups (FRGs) also carry out joint scientific
experiments.They differ from the CIALs in size (FRGs have
between 10 and 45 members) and because their members
participate for themselves as individuals, rather than on behalf of
the community. Often they build on existing local organizations.

A study of 21 FRGs in Kabale, Uganda, revealed that
participation in these groups follows a U-shaped pattern.
Participation is initially high when groups are formed, then
declines as members drop out and motivation wanes. Once
groups show successful results, more farmers join.The poorest
farmers appear to participate in equal numbers with less-poor
farmers, and women tend to dominate FRG membership,
although men tend to occupy leadership roles in mixed groups.

Experiments are undertaken on a shared plot that is
either rented by or donated to the group.All phases of experi-
mentation, from land preparation to harvesting, are imple-
mented collectively. Members develop common rules for the
group’s operation and membership. Including a sociologist
among the external researchers collaborating with the group is
instrumental in building the group’s organizational capacity.

Farmer innovation approaches (FIAs) in Africa identify 
farmer innovators to promote indigenous knowledge.Their
focus is mainly on soil and water conservation technologies.

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



