



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Institutions of collective action and systems of property rightsshape how people use natural resources, and these patterns of
use in turn affect the outcomes of people’s agricultural produc-
tion systems.Together, mechanisms of collective action and
property rights define the incentives people face for undertaking
sustainable and productive management strategies, and they
affect the level and distribution of benefits from natural
resources.The linkages between property rights, collective
action, and natural resource management have important impli-
cations for technology adoption, economic growth, food
security, poverty reduction, and environmental sustainability.Yet
despite their importance in people’s lives, property rights and
collective action are often undervalued, and when they are
recognized, often misunderstood.

WHAT ARE PROPERTY RIGHTS AND 
COLLECTIVE ACTION?

Collective action is often considered narrowly in terms of formal
organizations, and property rights only in terms of formal title
issued by the government. In fact, they are much more than that.

Collective action can be defined as voluntary action taken
by a group to achieve common interests. Members can act
directly on their own or through an organization. In the context
of natural resource management, even deciding on and observing
rules for use or non-use of a resource can be considered collec-
tive action, and it can be instituted through common property
regimes or through coordinated activities across individual farms.

Property rights can be defined as “the capacity to call upon
the collective to stand behind one’s claim to a benefit stream”
(Bromley 1991). Rights do not necessarily imply full ownership
and the sole authority to use and dispose of a resource; different
individuals, families, groups, or even the state often hold overlap-
ping use and decisionmaking rights.To be secure, rights should be
of sufficient duration to allow one to reap the rewards of invest-
ment and should be backed by an effective, socially sanctioned
enforcement institution.This institution is not always the govern-
ment; communities or other institutions may provide the backing.

LINKS TO SUSTAINABILITY OF NATURAL
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND AGRICULTURAL
SYSTEMS

The following figure illustrates how property rights and collec-
tive action affect the application of agricultural technologies and
natural resource management practices. Conventional on-farm
technologies like improved, high-yielding crop varieties (HYVs)
have a short, usually seasonal, time horizon and a small spatial
scale, often a single plot.They can be adopted by a single farmer—
even by a tenant. Other technologies may require longer time
horizons between their adoption and their payoff. In those situa-
tions, farmers need secure tenure (property rights) to have the

incentive and authority to adopt. For example, tenants are often
not allowed to plant trees or lack incentives to do terracing.
Moving from on-farm technologies to those that operate at larger
spatial scales implies a greater need for collective action to make
the technology work. Integrated pest management (IPM), for
example, must be coordinated across farms 

Most natural resource management practices have both
long time and large spatial scales. Both property rights and
collective action are therefore crucial for the management of
forests, rangelands, fisheries, watersheds, or irrigation systems

that serve more than a single farm. In some cases, the scale of
the resource to be managed may go beyond what can be done
by voluntary collective action by a community. Federations of
user groups may sometimes be able to manage larger resources,
but often the state or even international bodies become criti-
cally important partners. In these cases, co-management
between the community and government, rather than govern-
ment management alone, often leads to better outcomes.

Property rights and collective action also affect natural
resource management and agricultural production systems in
interaction with other factors such as information, wealth, risk,
labor, and marketing. Collective action and networks among
community members can facilitate access to information and
even allow farmers to participate in technology development.
Ownership of assets can serve as collateral for obtaining credit.
Microfinance programs have shown that action through groups
can also provide access to credit, with social bonds providing
collateral. Rights over common property resources frequently

FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 1 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Overview
RUTH MEINZEN-DICK AND MONICA DI GREGORIO

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT

Relative Importance of Property Rights and
Collective Action in the Adoption of Natural
Resource Management and Agricultural Practices



