



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Researchers and extension workers learn from and provide
technical assistance to farmers on the technologies that
farmers have already developed or help them to develop moni-
toring and evaluation processes. Researchers do not generally
introduce new technology options.

Collective action takes place not during innovation, but
rather during dissemination of the technology and its princi-
ples, as networks of local innovators are formed.These groups
not only investigate one another’s innovations, but also visit
farmer innovators outside their regions and host other
community members on their farms to exhibit their innova-
tions and disseminate their knowledge.

Networking helps build innovators’ self-esteem and
strengthens their relationships with researchers and extension
workers. Sponsoring programs actively promote individual
innovators, not only locally, but also nationally and internation-
ally, so that prestige and exposure are among the incentives for
participation.

HOW DO FRE APPROACHES COMPARE WITH
CONVENTIONAL RESEARCH? 

Much participatory research focuses on farm- and plot-level
technologies. FRE approaches that address landscape-level
resources and technologies, particularly those held in common,
are still the exception. Even participatory watershed research,
which starts with a landscape perspective, is mostly oriented
toward on-farm soil and water conservation measures.
Addressing landscape-level resource management using FRE
will undoubtedly require even greater attention to collective
action than is already employed in crop and farm technology
research.The challenges of fostering successful collective action
around natural resource management technologies currently
lead programs to focus on less complex systems.

The collective action needs for participatory research can
be seen as a continuum (see the figure). On one end of the
continuum are resources that are managed by individuals or
households at a plot level and that generate few spillovers for
their neighbors. Midway on the continuum are resources that
encompass significant environmental flows, such as water or
soils in a watershed or hillside context; involve many more
stakeholders in resource management; and generate more inno-
vations for their management. On the other end of the
continuum are common property resources, for which both the
costs and the benefits of management are shared by multiple
users who may prioritize the ultimate use of those resources
differently. In this case, research cannot be effective unless all

users are involved and there is agreement on which technolo-
gies are to be tested and the criteria to evaluate them.

Although this framework may be helpful for identifying
important collective action constraints for landscape-level
farmer research and extension, collective action for organizing
farmer participation and knowledge sharing is likely to add
considerable value to on-farm research. Collective action may
also be necessary for effective scaling up of technologies.
Empirical studies show that farmer participatory research, even
if conducted at the farm or plot level, leads to rapid scaling up
of results to landscape levels if the research is sufficiently
linked to local social networks and is designed to enhance
local human and social capacity.

Further stakeholder dialogue and research are needed to
identify which approaches are most effective at strengthening
collective action for FRE so that it

•  better addresses landscape resource issues;
•  fosters greater and more widespread human and social 

capital; and
• accelerates, improves, and scales up the outcomes of the

innovation process.

Ultimately, the goal of refining farmer-led research and
extension in these ways is to improve the livelihoods of the
poor. ■

For further reading see the publications available on the
Program on Participatory Research and Gender Analysis
website at http://www.prgaprogram.org/  

Anna Knox (a.knox@cgiar.org) is senior research fellow at the Centro International de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT) in Cali, Colombia; Nina Lilja (n.lilja@cgiar.org)
is a senior scientist with the Program on Participatory Research and Gender Analysis of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR).

Common-pool
resources

Collective Action Needs for FRE 

Plot/farm level,
low spillovers

High environmental
flows and spillovers

Collective ActionLess More

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



