



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 15 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Strengthening Collective Action 
BRYAN BRUNS AND PAKPING CHALAD BRUNS

Through collective action, forest users, fishers, irrigators,herders, and other rural producers can improve and sustain
resources vital for their lives. Inclusive institutions for collective
action empower communities to protect and improve their
livelihoods. Many communities of resource users possess long-
standing traditions of local cooperation, though these traditions
may have been weakened in more recent times. In other cases,
collective action seems absent, even when it ought to offer
substantial benefits for those involved.

What can be done when people seem unable or unwilling
to act together to pursue their interests? Insights on factors
crucial to stimulating and sustaining collective action have come
from abstract game theory, laboratory experiments, historical
research, case studies, and practical experience.This brief draws
on this research to review how citizens, nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), government agencies, and others can
strengthen collective action.

FACILITATING COLLECTIVE ACTION

Facilitators, community organizers, and similar change agents
have catalyzed communities to organize bottom-up identifica-
tion of priorities, planning, and action. In the Gal Oya irrigation
system in Sri Lanka, institutional organizers helped farmers
organize themselves, transforming a situation of many conflicts
with the irrigation agency and among farmers into one in which
farmers worked together to successfully repair irrigation canals,
equitably share water during shortage, and cooperate effectively
with the irrigation agency in planning and implementing irriga-
tion system rehabilitation.

Facilitators in different programs have included recent
university graduates, retrained agency field staff, local
community members, and “farmer consultants.” Facilitation
approaches have built on earlier methods in community devel-
opment and community organizing, combined with reforms to
enhance the capacity of technical agencies to work with
communities. Facilitators in legal empowerment programs have
helped paralegals and others in the community learn about
their rights and responsibilities and strengthen their ability to
protect local rights and interests.

Changes in policies and regulations and in everyday
attitudes and practices of agency staff can make it much easier
for communities and agencies to work together in managing
resources. Communities may already be capable of organizing
themselves, independently or with modest help, such as in
arranging elections.Where additional stimulus is helpful, facilita-
tors can reduce the initial barriers and costs of organizing. Care
is needed, however, to avoid dependence on facilitators and
instead build sustainable local capacity. Facilitators can reach out
to include poorer and more marginalized people in collective
action.

PARTICIPATORY LEARNING AND ACTION

The popularity of participatory rapid appraisal (PRA) has high-
lighted the rich toolkit of techniques available for analyzing,
planning, implementing, monitoring, and evaluating collective
action in rural development and resource management.The effec-
tiveness of participatory learning and action techniques is
founded on principles of empowerment, community control, and
respect for local knowledge. Joint walkthroughs, transects, sketch
maps, scale models, cropping calendars, matrix ranking, buzz
groups, and other techniques not only quickly generate valid
information and support analysis by stakeholders, but also are fun
for those involved.“Icebreaker” activities and listening skills
exercises help bring groups together and build trust and mutual
understanding. Including a diverse mix of participants—women,
poor people, ethnic minorities, elders, youths, and others—
encourages a full range of concerns to be voiced.Where conflicts
among stakeholders are severe, alternative dispute resolution
methods of negotiation, mediation, and arbitration may be useful.

Participatory application of planning methods such as logical
framework analysis empowers local stakeholders to make
decisions. Integrated pest management, which relies on coordi-
nated action among neighboring farmers, has shown the value of
integrating local and scientific knowledge.Technical tools, such as
geographic information systems and computer models, can
support better-informed decisionmaking by local stakeholders.
Sustaining changes beyond the stages of initial enthusiasm
requires good follow-through from planning to action and a
supportive institutional environment.

REDESIGNING INSTITUTIONS AND INCENTIVES 

When villagers have the authority to determine who harvests
wood and other products from nearby forests, they can better
guard against overexploitation and benefit from improved
management. Many of the problems of initiating and sustaining
collective action can be traced to inadequate incentives and to
institutional arrangements that discourage and displace collective
action. For example, state laws and regulations that deny local
people the right to control local resources leave them unable to
enforce sanctions against violators. In other cases governments
want to delegate responsibilities, such as protection of tree
seedlings, without securing the rights of users to share in the
benefits of harvesting timber and other forest products.

Research has identified key design principles that promote
collective action. Resource management institutions must adapt to
local conditions, offering local organizations the autonomy to
devise and revise their own rules. Participants will address
problems they identify as important, so it is essential that the
actions taken will benefit those involved. Groups need the power
to set boundaries and control access to the resource, to monitor
rule violations, and to enforce sanctions. Rules need to be
workable in terms of local ideas and resources. For example,

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



