



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Bryan Bruns (BryanBruns@BryanBruns.com; www.BryanBruns.com) has an independent practice as a consulting sociologist; Pakping Chalad Bruns
(bruns@cm.ksc.co.th) coordinates participatory watershed management projects in northern Thailand.

fishers find it simpler to control locations and kinds of fishing gear
rather than to regulate the amount that can be caught. Crafting
and applying such rules depends on both local agreements and
adequate legal backing from government. Small face-to-face groups
with strong, shared interests can combine into larger federations.
Where resource boundaries do not fit administrative units,
resource user groups need support to organize themselves in
suitably specialized organizations, backed by necessary legal
authority, that still accommodate village and other administrative
bodies. Incentives matter not just for ordinary resource users, but
also for leaders and for those who spend long hours, often at night
or in bad weather, patrolling forests, canals, or other remote areas.
Local organizations need authority and autonomy to establish a
structure that fits their conditions, with adequate incentives for
members and leaders, enforceable sanctions against those who
violate rules, and feedback mechanisms to learn from experience.

POLICY REFORMS 

In programs such as irrigation and forest management, national
governments are partially or fully devolving authority to user
groups or local governments. States are not only withdrawing from
some activities, but are also building capacity to provide new
services such as technical advice, dispute resolution through courts
and other forums, and regulatory arrangements to protect broader
societal concerns. Strengthening the resource tenure of existing
local institutions by, for example, formalizing community rights to
regulate land use, reinforces incentives for collective action.

One of the most powerful tools available for promoting
collective action lies in changing how governments provide
financial assistance. Subsidies can be offered to stimulate, rather
than displace, sustainable collective action. Social funds have
pioneered creative approaches to financing for community infra-
structure development. New approaches to agricultural
extension allow users to choose among a variety of service
providers. Grants, loans, vouchers, and demand-driven “menus”
for training and other services can all be designed to increase
incentives for collective action and local resource mobilization.

HARNESSING SOCIAL ENERGY 

Successful change often depends heavily on intangibles: political
will, trust, reputation, and legitimacy.When these are lacking,
communications strategies—such as political advocacy, public
relations campaigns, training programs, study tours, and dissemi-
nation of success stories—may be ineffective.They may even
backfire, breeding cynicism and disappointment and discrediting
future efforts.Where suitable conditions exist or have been
created, good communications are key to bringing about change.
Assurance that fellow resource users share a willingness to try
new approaches, reinforced by visible support from leaders in
high places in government, can be crucial in changing expecta-
tions and transforming decisions about joining in and supporting
collective action.

POTENTIAL PROBLEMS 

Communities are not homogenous, and attention needs to be
paid to the implications of economic and social differences.
Innovative efforts to initiate collective action should be based on
a pragmatic assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of
communities, markets, and governments and the opportunities
for appropriately combining different institutions.Whereas local
resource users possess valuable knowledge and social links that
help create and enforce rules, governments often retain advan-
tages in providing technical information, resolving disputes, and
strategically promoting wider societal interests such as equity
and environmental sustainability.

Governments have an important role in counterbalancing the
potential for local corruption and other abuses.They can limit
local elites’ efforts to grab the lion’s share of benefits from
collective action. Government’s role includes promoting demo-
cratic processes for choosing leaders and making decisions, estab-
lishing accountability mechanisms for reporting the use of funds,
and taking proactive initiatives to help the poor, excluded, or
disadvantaged to organize themselves and protect their interests.

Pilot projects often pioneer ideas about strengthening collec-
tive action. Success stories have, however, often benefited from
extra attention, special resources, strong charismatic leaders, and
other exceptional factors. Expanding innovations successfully
requires developing approaches suited to actual conditions and
sustainable on a routine basis with ordinary levels of resources.

CONCLUSION 

There is no one best way, no magic bullet or uniform recipe, to
strengthen collective action, in general or within a single sector.
Research on the ecological dynamics of rangelands and fisheries,
for example, has demonstrated the pitfalls of oversimplified
management strategies that assume certain knowledge and
stable conditions, instead emphasizing the need for well-
informed local management able to cope with risk and uncer-
tainty by adapting to changing circumstances. Research and
experience show that reforms to strengthen collective action
need to employ multiple approaches and to be customized by
local resource users to fit their local conditions in ways that
allow for continuing learning and adaptation. ■

For further reading, see PLA Notes (www.iied.org) featuring
articles on participatory learning and action approaches; N.
Uphoff, Learning from Gal Oya: Possibilities for Participatory
Development and Post-Newtonian Social Science (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1991); R. Meinzen-Dick,A. Knox, and
M. Di Gregorio, eds., Collective Action, Property Rights, and
Devolution of Natural Resource Management: Exchange of
Knowledge and Implications for Policy (Feldafing, Germany:
German Foundation for International Development [DSE],
2001); E. Ostrom,“Coping with Tragedies of the Commons,”
Annual Review of Political Science 2 (1999): 493–535
(http://polisci.annualreviews.org/cgi/content/full/2/1/493).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



