



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 16 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Strengthening Property Rights for the Poor
JOHN W. BRUCE

WHO ARE THE LANDED POOR?

Although many of the poor in the developing world arelandless, most of the rural poor have some access to land.
These “landed poor” remain poor not simply because their
holdings are small, but also because their land rights are weak and
insecure.The uncertainty they experience undermines their incen-
tives to make long-term investments in their land or use it
sustainably.Their land has limited economic value because it cannot
legally be transferred.The land users’ weak tenure also limits their
political empowerment.To the extent that land users must rely on
the goodwill of authorities or landlords for continued access to
the land that supports them, their political participation is
inhibited by the threats of those who hold power over them.

The landed poor have many faces:

•  They may hold the land in tenancy passed from father to son,
in which landlordism is a class, caste, or ethnic phenomenon.
Tenancy may have its roots in conquest that created subjects
as well as tenants of the original owners of the land.

•  They may be farmers under a system of leaseholds from the
state or a collective and may be deprived of any long-term
interest in their improvements on the land, even the homes
they have built.Their leases may be full of “development condi-
tions,” opportunities for land administrators to extract bribes
by threatening to find violations and terminate the leases.

•  They may be land reform beneficiaries whose landholdings,
because of neglect, paternalism, or political change, have never
been legally regularized.They may be prohibited from leasing
out the land even if they are ill or have no oxen to plow, or
they may be barred from supplementing their income by
working as hired labor.Without documentation, they may be
forgotten and, after the settlement scheme authority has
gone, vulnerable to land grabs by the powerful.

•  They may be users of forestlands that their families have
occupied and cultivated for a generation but who are barred
from acquiring secure property rights because of its classifica-
tion as a forest.

•  They may hold land under customary tenure systems unrec-
ognized by the state, with no legal basis for resisting the claim
of the official or merchant who one day appears on their land
with a title document granted by the national government.

•  They may be women in societies where land passes from
generation to generation in the male line and who only have
access to land as daughters and wives.When land allocation
decisions are made by men, a widow or divorcee is at the
mercy of her husband’s relatives and may be forced off the
land or required to marry her brother-in-law to protect the
rights to the land she farms.

STRENGTHENING THE PROPERTY RIGHTS OF
THE POOR

Despite these different situations, guidelines can help direct
efforts to strengthen property rights.

•  Trust land users with stronger property rights. It may be argued
they are not ready, they will abuse it, or they need supervi-
sion. But a half-century of experience has shown that owners,
responding to the incentives implicit in ownership, produce
better land husbandry than paternalistic schemes, which soon
sour and often become corrupt.

•  Legislate for stronger property rights. The state must provide a
robust legal framework of rights for land users.Although in
weak states the law often has little impact on the ground, an
adequate legal framework is a first and essential step.

•  Improved property rights means different things in different
contexts. It may mean co-ownership of land for husbands and
wives; empowerment of tenants to buy out their landlords;
provision of unconditional, inheritable land rights to settlers;
or state recognition that customary, community-based rights
stand on a par with land rights created by national statute.

•  Adopt local definitions of tenure security when appropriate.
Adequate tenure security does not necessarily mean
ownership in the Western sense.The question should always
be:What do rural people need? Modest increases in tenure
security can be transformative.Though some systems need
greater transparency and accountability, many customary or
community-based tenure systems can provide adequate
tenure security.

•  Always ask,“Security of tenure for whom?” Consider which
beneficiary is most likely to use the land effectively.Titles are
commonly awarded to male household heads, but others may
be more likely to undertake investments in the land.

•  Protect common property rights. The poor often depend dispro-
portionately on common property resources. Some
resources used in common, such as wetlands, forests, and
pastures, may be secured only by strengthening community
property rights.Tenure security is not only about individual
property rights, but also about legitimate common property
and state rights in some categories of land.

•  Provide for adequate proof of property rights. In urban and
periurban contexts and where rural land is highly valued,
adequate proof may entail formal surveys, titling, and registra-
tion of holdings. Elsewhere, where land rights are of lower
value and transferred largely within the community, adequate
proof may involve demarcating community boundaries and
empowering local communities to maintain simple but
reliable records of individual and family landholdings and
transactions.

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



