



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


John W. Bruce (jwbruce@worldbank.org) is senior counsel (land) at the World Bank in Washington, DC, and is a former director of the Land Tenure Center at
the University of Wisconsin–Madison.

•  Educate people about their rights in land. Government agencies,
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and the private
sector, through campaigns and media initiatives, can all help
educate people about their land rights. Rights not understood
will not be defended, and rights must be defended every day
or they will be lost to the powerful.

•  Establish adequate dispute settlement mechanisms. Rights that
cannot be defended against challenges provide no incentives
and no security.Adequate mechanisms to settle disputes
include adjudication or alternative dispute resolution, in courts
or alternative fora, and must be accessible and affordable.

INSTITUTIONALIZING PROPERTY RIGHTS
REFORMS

The steps identified here will not be achieved overnight. For
most countries it takes 10 years to put successful tenure reform
programs in place and another 20 to implement them satisfacto-
rily. There are numerous pitfalls to be avoided in the process.

•  Be politically astute. Whatever “experts” may see as the advan-
tages of strengthening property rights, politicians often
respond to other signals: new revenues from property taxes
on rapidly appreciating land values, new political constituen-
cies developed by empowering the previously neglected with
property rights, or accommodation of the market-dominant
classes by making land a commodity for raising capital. Painful
compromises among divergent interests and objectives are
needed to achieve reform.

•  Embody new property rights in law. In times of real sea changes
in the political economies of nations, legal reform can be
forgotten and reforms processed administratively, without
firm legal basis.This approach only invites challenges to new
rights later, once the reform is achieved and the political
impetus behind it wanes.

•  Exploit all possibilities for legal change. All avenues, from national
legislation to judicial reform through court decision to
community-based reform of customs, can be effective on the
ground.

•  Constraints in capacity and finance can undermine implementa-
tion. Strengthened property rights systems are costly—they
often require substantial state or community investment in
systems for survey, adjudication, and titling, for registration of
transactions and inheritances, and for dispute resolution.
Many a property rights reform has stalled for lack of financial
support.

• NGOs can play positive roles in the reform process. Nonstate
organizations of the marginalized can voice the demands of
the poor and press for reforms. Such organizations have skills
in areas like rights education and dispute settlement that are
vital to implementing reforms.

•  Replacing inadequate property rights systems needs care. Where
an existing system of property rights is judged inadequate,
one must be careful in replacing it, particularly where it is
culturally embedded. Attempts at reform of customary
systems that do not succeed in changing behavior can create
confusion and conflict between claims based on custom and
others based in national law.

•  Equitable strengthening of property rights is the goal. The rights
of all stakeholders should be considered together. Reforms to
strengthen the property rights of one individual or group,
especially in customary tenure contexts, should not inadver-
tently weaken the property rights of others.

•  Be alert for unintended consequences. Even well-conceived
reforms can be hijacked by the powerful.A classic case is the
appropriation of common areas by the powerful as land titling
approaches, depriving the poor of a resource upon which they
rely.Vulnerable groups are often unrepresented in local imple-
mentation authorities, and mechanisms must be built into the
implementation process to ensure their participation in reform
processes and reform benefits. And enactment of reforms of
tenancy systems can, if enforcement is weak, lead to the
expulsion of tenants from their holdings by angry landlords.

•  New property rights alone are insufficient. Property rights
reforms, particularly those seeking to strengthen the
marketability of land rights, may be unable to achieve their
goal when credit markets are badly distorted and the credit
supply system is in its infancy.

CONCLUSION  

Strengthening the property rights of the poor is a complex
project.The landed poor are a heterogeneous group who hold
rights to their landed assets in diverse and complicated ways.
Efforts to increase the security of their tenure need to be
sensitive to the specific circumstances that characterize each
case, the existing legal conditions, the strength or weakness of
available financial and property registration systems, the needs
of each group of stakeholders, and the possibilities of unin-
tended consequences. Common property rights must also be
protected. ■

For further reading see World Bank, Land Policies for Growth
and Poverty Reduction, Policy Research Report (Washington,
DC:World Bank, 2003); Krishna B. Ghimire, ed., Whose Land?
Civil Society Perspectives on Land Reform and Rural Poverty
Reduction (Rome: Popular Coalition to Reduce Hunger and
Poverty, International Fund for Agricultural Development, and
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development,
2003); Camilla Toulmin and Julian Quan, eds., Evolving Land
Rights, Policy, and Tenure in Africa (London: Department for Inter-
national Development, Natural Resources Institute, and Inter-
national Institute for Environment and Development, 2000).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



