



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Ruth Meinzen-Dick (r.meinzen-dick@cgiar.org) is a senior research fellow in IFPRI's Environment and Production Technology Division (EPTD) and
coordinator of CAPRi. Monica Di Gregorio (m.digregorio@cgiar.org) is a research analyst for the CAPRi Program and EPTD.

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

function as a buffer against risk, especially environmental events
and loss of other livelihoods. Similarly, collective action enables
risk sharing and inspires mechanisms for collective self-help.
Collective action and reciprocity arrangements offer ways to
overcome labor shortages, especially for practices that require
intense labor effort in concentrated periods.

Property rights and collective action are also interde-
pendent.This is particularly clear in the case of common
property regimes, where holding rights in common reinforces
collective action among members, and collective action is
needed to manage the resource. Maintaining property rights can
require collective action, especially in the case of landscape-level
resources and where outsiders challenge local claims  

LINKS TO POVERTY REDUCTION

Property rights and collective action affect people’s livelihoods.
The most vulnerable and marginalized rural groups often lack
access to resources (that is, they have no or insecure property
rights) and find participation in collective action too costly
because of lack of time and resources. Enhancing rights to even
relatively small homestead plots can increase food security by
allowing women to grow gardens, and rights to common
property often provide insurance for the poor.Tenure security
provides key assets for poverty reduction, allowing the poor to
help themselves by growing food, investing in more productive
activities, or using property as collateral for credit. Collective
action can increase food security through mutual insurance.

Both property rights and collective action are empowerment
tools. Poor people often have difficulty making their voices heard.
Interventions to strengthen their property rights or to help them
participate in collective activities improve their bargaining
positions. Security of rights and the capacity to manage local
common resources allow people to make decisions while taking
the future into consideration.This longer-term approach generally
translates into more environmentally sustainable management
practices and a healthier resource base for future generations.

IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY AND PRACTICE

Many countries are now adopting policies to devolve the manage-
ment of forests, fisheries, irrigation, watersheds, or rangelands to
local communities or to develop some form of co-management
between the state and communities. In addition, community-driven
development initiatives are helping local organizations to set
priorities for local public service spending and to provide services
such as schools and health centers. For these programs to
succeed, effective collective action within communities is essential.

As the briefs on forestry, irrigation, fisheries, and rangelands
in this series show, successful collective action does not always
emerge, especially where traditional management institutions
(like tribes on rangelands) have been weakened by migration or
excessive state intervention. Government agencies need to
change how they work with communities, becoming more

conscious in their efforts to strengthen local management insti-
tutions and allowing more local decisionmaking without
imposing external rules.

Devolution programs that transfer management responsibility
for natural resources from government agencies to farmers often
fail to transfer corresponding rights.Yet rights over the resource
are needed to provide groups with the incentives to conserve and
even invest in the resources.Without recognized decisionmaking
rights, the groups lack the authority to manage the resource or to
stop members or outsiders from breaking the rules. Recognized
property rights not only reinforce collective action that is needed
for collective management, but also provide security for individuals
and households. Several briefs in this collection suggest ways of
strengthening property rights for the poor.

Many other government and nongovernmental organiza-
tions involved in community development are addressing collec-
tive action issues, whether through revolving credit or livestock
schemes, agricultural extension groups, or domestic water
supply.There is a wealth of practical experience on ways to
organize or strengthen collective action. Researchers have docu-
mented factors that affect collective action, but their findings are
often based on a few successful case studies. Much more needs
to be learned about what approaches do and do not foster
collective action that continues beyond the project intervention,
as well as about how externally induced organizations interact
with indigenous institutions for collective action. Promising
approaches suggested by briefs in this collection include using
facilitators, community organizers, or farmer-to-farmer learning;
providing groups with credit to make investments and create
property rights; and increasing access to technical information
about resources. As collective action grows, local groups are
forming federations up to the national level to address their
problems at appropriate levels and to gain a voice in policy
decisions, including critical issues of rights to resources. ■

For further reading see D. Bromley, Environment and
Economy: Property Rights and Public Policy (Cambridge, MA:
Basil Blackwell, 1991); R. Meinzen-Dick,A. Knox, F. Place,
and B. Swallow, eds., Innovation in Natural Resource
Management:The Role of Property Rights and Collective Action
in Developing Countries (Baltimore: John Hopkins University
Press, 2002); R. Meinzen-Dick,A. Knox, and M. Di Gregorio,
eds., Collective Action, Property Rights, and Devolution of
Natural Resource Management: Exchange of Knowledge and
Implications for Policy (Feldafing, Germany: German
Foundation for International Development [DSE]/Food 
and Agriculture Development Centre [ZEL], 2001),
http://www.capri.cgiar.org/workshop_devolution.asp; and 
A. Knox, R. Meinzen-Dick, and P. Hazell,“Property Rights,
Collective Action, and Technologies for Natural Resource
Management,” CAPRi Working Paper 1 (Washington, DC:
IFPRI, 1998), http://www.capri.cgiar.org/pdf/capriwp01.pdf.
Also visit the CAPRi website at http://www.capri.cgiar.org.

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



