



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 2 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Understanding Collective Action 
ELINOR OSTROM

UNDERSTANDING COLLECTIVE ACTION AND
COLLECTIVE ACTION PROBLEMS

Collective action occurs when more than one individual isrequired to contribute to an effort in order to achieve an
outcome. People living in rural areas and using natural
resources engage in collective action on a daily basis when they  

• plant or harvest food together;

• use a common facility for marketing their products;

• maintain a local irrigation system or patrol a local forest to
see that users are following rules; and 

• meet to decide on rules related to all of the above.

Frequently, however, it becomes difficult to exclude nonpar-
ticipants from benefiting from the collective action of others.
This situation creates a collective action problem for the partic-
ipants.When individuals seek out short-term benefits for them-
selves alone, they are better off when others contribute to the
collective action and they do not. In this case, they benefit
without paying the costs. Of course, if all individuals pursue
short-term, self-centered benefits, no collective benefits are
achieved.

CAN PARTICIPANTS OVERCOME THE 
COLLECTIVE ACTION PROBLEMS THEY FACE?

Some theoretical treatises assume that individuals are unable to
overcome the temptation to pursue short-term,“selfish”
benefits.According to this view, effective collective action can
be achieved only if external policymakers impose government
or private ownership. It is true that appropriately designed
property rights systems can help individuals overcome collec-
tive action problems, but such systems need not always be
externally imposed or involve government or private
ownership. Indeed, efforts by national governments to impose
uniform rules on large stretches of land involving diverse
ecological and sociological systems have frequently led to
worsening natural resource conditions rather than improve-
ments. Outsiders’ efforts to impose property rights often fail to
take into account indigenous property rights and the organiza-
tions that individuals themselves have established over time.

Many local indigenous institutions have evolved as the
people affected have tried to find better ways of organizing
joint activities. Indigenous methods for engaging in collective
action have sometimes survived for centuries, through floods,
fires, pests, overpopulation, and warfare.These institutions may
not be recorded in any formal records and are frequently
unknown except to local participants.

Any effort to influence policies for managing water, range-
lands, forests, fisheries, and other natural resources must take
into account factors that increase the likelihood that individuals

will engage in their own collective action to manage local
resources. By understanding these factors and developing
policies to enhance them, national and international agencies
can increase the level of collective action generated at the local
level.The efforts of national and international agencies can then
be devoted to large-scale collective action problems that do
require their attention and effort.

Policymakers sometimes want to learn the precise formula
that will solve a particular problem. Extensive research has
shown, however, that no blueprints exist that can reliably be
used to solve collective action problems, either within or across
sectors. Instead of uniform blueprints, research has highlighted
broad design principles that have been used by successful
groups. Furthermore, researchers have identified the attributes
of groups and resources that facilitate successful solutions to
these problems.

WHAT PARTICIPANT ATTRIBUTES ARE
CONDUCIVE TO OVERCOMING COLLECTIVE
ACTION PROBLEMS?

The first characteristic of successful efforts is agreement by the
involved individuals that the problem at hand is an important
one.At first this characteristic sounds trivial, but it is not.
Government agencies frequently complain that local popula-
tions do not perceive collective action problems as either
relevant to their concerns or within their abilities to address. In
regard to the conservation of wildlife, for example, residents
living around a reserve frequently find themselves paying high
costs and receiving few benefits for the presence of the wildlife
reserve. If people’s crops are eaten, their animals are threat-
ened, and even the lives of their children are at risk, they will
need to see substantial and tangible benefits from the establish-
ment of a park before they will see any reason to engage in
collective action to preserve wildlife.

A second factor is the degree of autonomy a group has to
take collective action on its own or within a nested institutional
setting, and this factor can depend on the macro political-insti-
tutional environment in which individuals find themselves. For
many local groups, past attempts to take collective action
proved dangerous. In a highly authoritarian regime, independent
action is perceived as threatening to the center. Individuals who
have lived in such regimes for long periods of time are always
nervous about independent action, even when assured that the
regime has changed. In addition, the capacity to create a private
association without long and bureaucratic processes or
expensive filing of documents greatly enhances the capabilities
of local people to solve problems.

Other factors relate to the way users of a resource view
both the future and each other. If users have a high discount
rate in regard to a particular resource—that is, they view exit

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



