



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Elinor Ostrom (ostrom@indiana.edu) is codirector of the Center for the Study of Institutions, Population, and Environmental Change and of the Workshop in
Political Theory and Policy Analysis at Indiana University.

as a reasonable short-term option—there is little motivation
to put in extensive time and effort to create a sustainable,
long-term governance system.Those who have overcome
collective action problems usually have a relatively low
discount rate in relation to the particular problem at hand.
Secure property rights for the group can help reinforce a long-
term perspective. Participants must also have some level of
trust in the reliability of others and be willing to use broad
strategies of reciprocity. If participants fear that others are
going to take advantage of them, no one will wish to initiate
costly actions only to find that others are not reciprocating.
Prior organizational experience and the presence of supportive
local leaders also reduce the transaction costs that must be
paid before finding possible solutions.

WHAT RESOURCE SYSTEM ATTRIBUTES ARE 
CONDUCIVE TO OVERCOMING COLLECTIVE
ACTION PROBLEMS?

Overcoming collective action problems is always a challenge.
Four factors enhance the likelihood that local users will move
toward devising institutions for sustainable development:

1. The flow of resource units, such as fish, water, or forest
products, is relatively predictable.

2. Resources are scarce but not entirely destroyed.

3. Reliable and valid indicators of the condition of the
resource system are available locally at reasonable costs.

4. The resource system is moderately sized.

The presence of all four conditions enhances the proba-
bility that local users can come to a common understanding of
the nature of the system they are using and of how their own
collective action can create rules about who uses how many of
the resource units and where, when, and how these uses are
allowed. It is important to note that not every group facing
favorable conditions is successful in organizing itself and
sustaining that organization over time. Nor are groups with
less positive conditions fated to fail forevermore.

Collective action problems are found within the councils
of the highest levels of government as well as those related to
local resource management. It is important for policymakers to
understand both the importance of local initiatives and the
difference that external authorities can make by enabling
groups to take initiative and experiment with diverse local
institutions and by affecting some of the conditions through
the policy environment.

WHAT CAN BE DONE?

Imposing top-down, detailed prescriptions for “solving” collective
action problems by policymakers located far from particular
collective action problems has rarely been a successful strategy.
National agencies can nonetheless accomplish a great deal by  

•  providing accurate information about natural resource
systems, such as groundwater replenishment rates, geolog-
ical structure, and long-term precipitation records;

•  recording key information about the behavior of wildlife
and fisheries not available to local users;

•  providing arenas for low-cost conflict resolution;

•  designing mechanisms for discourse and debate by local
users in their effort to learn from one another and
discover new strategies;

•  disseminating information about successful organizations
and the design principles that characterize them; and

•  creating institutional mechanisms that local participants can
use to organize themselves, such as through special
districts, private associations, and local/regional govern-
ments.

It is also important that policymakers not presume that
they are the only relevant actors in efforts to solve collective
action problems.They have partners if they are willing to
recognize them. ■

For further reading see A. Poteete and E. Ostrom,“An
Institutional Approach to the Study of Forest Resources”
(Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 2002), http://www.
indiana.edu/~workshop/W01-8_counter.html; National
Research Council, The Drama of the Commons (Washington,
DC: National Academies Press, 2002); and C. C. Gibson,
M. McKean, and E. Ostrom, People and Forests: Communities,
Institutions, and Governance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2000).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



