



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Collecting firewood from a forest or water from a stream,grazing a herd, felling trees, preventing entry to a protected
area, and making decisions about who should or should not have
rights to collect firewood or water are all expressions of the
exercise of property rights to natural resources.

Property rights govern who can do what with resources.
They specify the claims and related obligations of different
actors—individuals or groups—to the benefits of a resource.
The assigned set of rights and obligations shape the authority
and incentives structure of the rights holder.

MANY TYPES OF RIGHTS

People often think about property rights in a narrow sense as
ownership—the right to completely and exclusively control a
resource. But property rights are better understood as over-
lapping “bundles” of rights. There are many combinations of
such rights, but they can often be grouped as  

•  use rights, such as the right to access the resource (for
example, to walk across a field), withdraw from a resource
(pick some wild plants), or exploit a resource for economic
benefit; and

•  control or decisionmaking rights, such as the rights to
management (plant a crop), exclusion (prevent others from
accessing the field), and alienation (rent out, sell, or give
away the rights).

These rights may also be conditioned by the amount, timing,
and other aspects of resource use and management. Several indi-
viduals or groups may have different kinds of rights over the
same resource. For example, all members of a community may
be allowed to bathe in a river or collect drinking water, but only
certain farmers may be allowed to draw water for irrigating
fields and to decide how to distribute that water in the dry
season, while the state may claim ultimate “ownership” of the
water, including the right to reassign it to others. Even on land
declared as state forest land, individuals from a community may
have the right to collect medicinal plants or fallen branches for
firewood (use), local groups may have the right to plant trees
(management) and guard them (exclusion), but the state may
retain the right to approve any felling of trees and to collect
revenue from users.

LEGAL PLURALISM: MANY SOURCES OF RIGHTS

To recognize property rights in practice, we need to look beyond
state-issued titles to the resource. As illustrated in the figure,
there are multiple sources of property rights, including:

•  international treaties and law;

•  state (or statutory) law;

•  religious law and accepted religious practices;

•  customary law, which may be formal written custom or
living interpretations of custom;

•  project (or donor) law, including project or program regu-
lations; and

•  organizational law, such as rules made by user groups.

To understand this complexity, it is useful to start from
people’s experiences with access to and control over resources.
From this vantage point it is clear that people draw upon a
range of strategies for claiming and obtaining resources,
depending on their knowledge and assessment of which best
suit their situation.

The coexistence of these laws does not mean that all laws
are equal or equally powerful. Each is only as strong as the
institution that stands behind it. Often state law is more
powerful and used by government officials, for example, to
declare and enforce forests as state property. Statutory law is
also used by powerful outsiders, such as logging companies with
concessions in customary lands, to claim resources in ways that
are not locally recognized as legitimate. On the other hand,
actions of local communities, such as petitions, demonstrations,
and roadblocks, are ways of claiming locally recognized rights as
well as seeking recognition of their rights by the state.

In some cases state law, although important, is not as
relevant as the village, ethnic community, or user group in deter-

Coexisting Multiple Sources of Property Rights

FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 3 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Understanding Property Rights
RUTH MEINZEN-DICK, RAJENDRA PRADHAN, AND MONICA DI GREGORIO

Project

State

International

Religious

Local/customary
and

organizational

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



