



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


Ruth Meinzen-Dick (r.meinzen-dick@cgiar.org) is a senior research fellow in IFPRI's Environment and Production Technology Division (EPTD) and coordinator of
the System-wide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights (CAPRi) of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR); Rajendra
Pradhan (rpradhan@mail.com.np) is executive director of the International Centre for Study of Nature, Environment, and Culture (ICNEC), Kathmandu, Nepal;
Monica Di Gregorio (m.digregorio@cgiar.org) is a research analyst for the CAPRi Program and EPTD.

mining property rights on the ground. For example, state laws
on inheritance are often ignored in favor of religious laws or
local custom. Research has shown that state titling programs do
not always provide stronger security than customary rights and
may even be a source of insecurity for women and households
with less information or fewer connections to obtain govern-
ment land registration.

While legal pluralism can create uncertainty because rival
claimants can use a large legal repertoire to claim a resource,
multiple legal frameworks also provide flexibility for people to
maneuver in their use of natural resources.

PROPERTY RIGHTS AS FLEXIBLE AND DYNAMIC
SYSTEMS

Often the more variable the resource, the more flexible are the
property rights that develop over it. Water rights are particu-
larly fluid, changing by season and year, depending on the avail-
ability of the resource and demands for water. Similarly, many
customary rangeland management systems negotiate access
rights depending on factors like weather and the social relations
between the groups.This flexibility provides a measure of
security in times of drought or other disasters, by creating recip-
rocal expectations of resource sharing between groups.

Another source of change in property rights comes from
the interaction between types of law. The different legal frame-
works do not exist in isolation, but influence each other.
Changes in state law can influence local custom, but changes in
customary practices can also lead to changes in state law. For
state law to be effective on the ground, it must be implemented
effectively. Legal literacy programs may be needed to inform
the public—and even government officials—about changes in
the laws.

How exactly these different legal orders influence each
other depends on power relationships between the “bearers” of
different laws. Power relationships also determine the distribu-
tion of rights and whether people can effectively claim their
rights.Actual rights to natural resources are therefore a product
of locality, history, changes in resource condition and use,
ecology, and social relationships and are subject to negotiation.
Thus, in practice, property rights are not cast in stone or in title
deeds, but negotiated.

PROPERTY RIGHTS, RESPONSIBILITIES,AND 
DEVOLUTION PROGRAMS

Effective resource management entails balancing benefit entitle-
ments and responsibilities of property rights. After failing to
effectively manage natural resource systems centrally, many
governments are now undertaking decentralization and devolu-
tion programs to transfer responsibility for resource manage-
ment to local governments and user groups. Unfortunately,

many such programs emphasize the transfer of responsibilities
without transferring the corresponding rights. As a result, user
groups may lack the incentive, and even the authority, to
manage the resource.

When devolution programs do transfer rights over
resources to a user group or local government, that institution
becomes the gatekeeper determining individuals’ rights over the
resource. Effective voice in those organizations becomes
essential to exercising any decisionmaking rights over the
resource. This situation can be especially problematic for
women when formal rules limit membership to the “head of
household” or when social norms make it unacceptable for
women to speak up in public. Because strengthening control
rights of some means restricting the use rights of others, those
who are not members of the group in question may have less
access to the resource.

Thus, while effective transfers of rights and responsibilities
from centralized government agencies to local organizations can
lead to more sustainable resource management, authorities must
give due attention to the equity outcomes, especially noting who
loses access to resources.

IMPLICATIONS 

Although property rights have a powerful influence on human
welfare and natural resource management, this key institution is
complex. Property rights do change over time, but legislative
reform alone is unlikely to change the manifestation of property
rights on the ground. Rather, change occurs through the social
and power relations and negotiations between different groups,
which may appeal to a variety of legal bases for claiming
property rights. Instead of looking for simple “solutions” to
property rights issues, it is more useful to try to understand the
complexity. This approach involves looking at the claims and the
bases of the claims made by individuals, groups, or government
entities to different bundles of rights over the resource and at
the different types of law that pertain to the use or management
of the resource. Security of tenure is important, but so is flexi-
bility to respond to changing conditions that affect resource use
and property rights. ■

For further reading see R. Meinzen-Dick and R. Pradhan,
“Legal Pluralism and Dynamic Property Rights,” CAPRi
Working Paper 22 (Washington, DC: IFPRI, 2002),
http://www.capri.cgiar.org/pdf/capriwp22.pdf; J. Spiertz and M.
G.Wiber, eds., The Role of Law in Natural Resource
Management (The Hague, the Netherlands:VUGA, 1996); B. R.
Bruns and R. S. Meinzen-Dick, eds., Negotiating Water Rights
(New Delhi and London:Vistaar Publications and Intermediate
Technology Development Group Publishing, 2000).

International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, N.W. •  Washington, D.C. 20006-1002  •  U.S.A.
Phone: +1-202-862-5600  •  Fax: +1-202-467-4439
Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

CGIAR System-wide Program on

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND 
PROPERTY RIGHTS

www.capri.cgiar.org



