



















































Collective action and property rights for sustainable development


FOCUS 11  •  BRIEF 4 OF 16  •  FEBRUARY 2004

COLLECTIVE ACTION AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Local-Level Public Goods and Collective Action
NANCY MCCARTHY

In communities throughout the world people work togetherto provide goods and services that their governments do
not provide.They build and maintain local parks, feeder roads,
religious buildings, and community halls; they operate volunteer
fire control groups and establish rules for local natural
resource management. Sometimes local groups share responsi-
bilities for maintaining public services, such as schools and
health clinics, with their local or central governments.

Not all communities, however, provide the optimal level of
local public goods. Evidence shows that not only are some
public goods provided more often than others, but also that
some communities mobilize themselves more easily to provide
them. Given the vital importance of public goods in providing
basic services necessary for alleviating poverty and in managing
the local natural resource base for sustainable development,
this brief offers an approach to understanding the problems
communities face in providing different kinds of public goods.

WHY ARE SOME PUBLIC GOODS “EASIER” TO
PROVIDE THAN OTHERS?

Even within the same community, people cooperate to provide
certain public goods but not others. It is possible to explore
this variability by asking, How do one individual’s benefits
change depending on how many other people actually
contribute to a specific activity?  Using game theory to
examine an individual’s incentives to contribute to a public
good helps to highlight the exact nature of the interdepend-
ency among community members in terms of the decision to
contribute or not.

This brief considers five potential incentive structures that
are likely to be important empirically, although the actual
number of possibilities is much greater. In the first case, every
individual is better off contributing to the public good even if
no others contribute. In this case, the role of the group might
be only to share information and coordinate activities. Such an
incentive structure might occur when there are large
increasing returns to contributions in the provision of a public
good. Certain pest control measures might have this structure;
if each individual controls pests on his or her own farm, overall
pest prevalence may drop to zero, so everyone realizes large
benefits. Unfortunately, such a fortuitous incentive structure
does not occur often.

In the second case, the individual may be better off
contributing to the public good if no one else does, but when
others contribute the individual would prefer to “free ride,” or
contribute nothing.This case is often referred to as a “chicken
game.” As in the first case, the primary role of the group is to
coordinate actions among members. Coordination is particu-
larly important if the good must be repeatedly provided and
members can take turns in providing the good. Herd mobility

is such an example: each herder would prefer to stay at home
and avoid the costs of mobility but would rather move if
others remain at home. Coordinating herd movements can
lead to a socially optimal pattern of herd mobility.

In a third incentive structure, the individual might prefer to
contribute to the public good if all others do but would not if
no one else does—an example of an “assurance game.” In this
case, the role of the group is to assure each member that
others will not free ride. Given the incentive structure, this
case is likely to be more costly to manage than simply coordi-
nating movements as required under a “chicken game”
structure. Investments in community infrastructure sometimes
have this structure, particularly when investments are discrete
decisions, such as construction of a building or bridge.

In the fourth example the individual may prefer not to
contribute if no one else does and also prefer to free ride if
everyone else contributes—even though all members would
be better off if each one contributed his or her own share. In
this case, the incentive structure resembles a “prisoner’s
dilemma.” This situation is likely to occur when returns to
contributions increase but at a decreasing rate: for example,
certain soil erosion control measures. Such an incentive
structure may also result when returns are highly variable, as
they are, for example, for investments in agroforestry tech-
niques in regions with high climatic variability. Managing this
type of incentive structure is likely to be the most costly.

Finally, it may be the case that it would be best, under
existing conditions, not to provide the public good at all. In
other words, social returns to a certain public good may simply
be too low for it to be in the interest of the community
members to provide that good.

Several key factors determining externalities and incentive
structures include technological characteristics (such as the
returns to scale or if the good is discrete), costs of inputs, the
extent to which private goods can substitute for public goods,
and the uncertainty or variability in returns from the public
good.The provision of certain public goods may also affect the
returns to other public goods. For instance, returns to invest-
ments in soil erosion control measures undertaken on
common pastures may depend on collective action in managing
use rates of those pastures. Returns to improving roads and
bridges may be higher where successful pest control leads to
higher marketable crop surpluses.

Finally, actions in one community may affect returns to
activities elsewhere, such that groups operating across commu-
nities may be far more successful than more localized ones.
Pests, fires, and water easily cross community lines and
therefore require many communities to cooperate. Of course,
externalities that affect large segments of the population are
precisely those that give rise to government involvement. Real
and effective partnerships between government agencies and

FOR FOOD, AGRICULTURE,
AND THE ENVIRONMENT



