























































Public-private partnerships for improved reforestation outcomes in the Philippines


D. Cagalanan /World Development Perspectives 3 (2016) 32–34 33
achievements as contributions toward the national target. This
paper discusses the experience of one people’s organization to
identify some of the issues that limited the success of past pro-
grams that the NGP risks repeating, and to assess how the
public-private partnership with the Energy Development Corpora-
tion (EDC), a private geothermal company, may (or may not) help
to overcome them. It illustrates the innovative potential of the har-
monization strategy, which facilitates not only adding area toward
the national target, but also improving outcomes of community-
based efforts.

EDC is one of the major private sector partners for the NGP and
has its own reforestation program called BINHI, initiated in 2008
with the goal of restoring 1000 ha of forest cover per year for ten
years, with special emphasis on indigenous and endangered spe-
cies to enhance biodiversity. In line with the national
community-based strategy, EDC implements its reforestation pro-
gram by partnering with people’s organizations whose members
are paid to establish and maintain the sites. Many of the same peo-
ple’s organizations are also contracted with the state for NGP sites.
The contributions of EDC’s reforestation program to the NGP, par-
ticularly in the protected area context, are illustrated in the expe-
rience of a people’s organization called Bagong Silang BINHI
Farmer’s Association, Inc. (BSBFAI), located within the Northern
Negros Natural Park in the province of Negros Occidental. BSBFAI
has a 300 ha EDC area (150 ha with mixed indigenous species,
150 ha with mixed indigenous species and fruit trees), as well as
various NGP areas (mixed exotic species, indigenous species, and
fruit trees).
2. Creating ‘‘Communities and building capacity

BSBFAI was originally formed as a people’s organization in 1999
(under a different name) as part of the Community-Based Forest
Management Program. Its formation was initiated and assisted
by the state. It is often the case that the state organizes and regis-
ters a people’s organization where one is not pre-existing for the
purpose of implementing its community-based programs. BSBFAI
was issued a 25-year renewable community tenure agreement
for 706.6 ha within a then forest reserve, now a national protected
area. As described above, the agreement stipulates that BSBFAI is
responsible for protecting the forest within its tenure area, and
in exchange is given access to plantation projects to support its
members’ livelihoods. When the initial livelihood projects ended
in the early 2000s, however, BSBFAI became inactive and no longer
continued the livelihood or protection activities. The eventual fail-
ure of projects after the end of funding and organizing activities by
the implementing agency/organization is a common occurrence in
the Philippines. This failure is in large part due to a mismatch
between the paradigm of community-based forest management
under which social cohesion and the desire to work for the com-
mon good are assumed to be present, and realities on the ground
where this is not always the case, especially when people’s organi-
zations are organized by the project implementer and are not pre-
existing with institutional structures in place. This was the case for
BSBFAI, whose members are smallholder farmers primarily con-
cerned about their individual livelihoods, and they did not have
prior experience in community decision-making and resource
management (Cagalanan, 2015).

In 2011, after several years of being inactive, EDC re-organized
(and re-named) BSBFAI to be a community partner for its reforesta-
tion program. BSBFAI’s reactivation made it an eligible community
partner for the NGP as well, and within its tenure area, BSBFAI now
has both EDC and NGP reforestation sites. The reactivation was
similar to the initial activation, with the members being organized
and registered as an accredited people’s organization under the ini-
tiative of EDC and not themselves. However, since the reactivation,
EDC has remained active in community organizing and capacity
building, which has helped to drive BSBFAI’s success. EDC has for-
est ranger staff that attend almost all BSBFAI monthly meetings
and regularly arrange workshops and trainings to address critical
issues at the community level, including: building social capital,
respect and cooperation; addressing logistical issues regarding
how to manage community activities and share labor requirements
and benefits; improving awareness of rules and regulations; and
settling disputes. EDC assisted in the development of BSBFAI by-
laws and facilitated elections of organization officials. EDC has
helped BSBFAI coordinate activities and resolve problems in the
EDC and the NGP reforestation sites. While officers of the state
have also conducted some workshops with BSBFAI, and attend
many monthly meetings to manage activities when their projects
are ongoing, the long-term and regular community organizing
and capacity building that EDC has conducted is far greater than
what the state has the funding and personnel availability to under-
take (EDC projects generally last 5 years, compared to state pro-
jects that typically last 3). In fact, EDC ‘‘adopted” part of BSBFAI’s
NGP site, extending the maintenance phase after the shorter NGP
funding period ended.

EDC’s efforts appear to be having a positive impact on organiza-
tional capacity and initiative of BSBFAI members. Even when the
EDC rangers are not present, BSBFAI continues to organize activi-
ties, keep records, and address problems in its projects. Moveover,
with initial planning assistance by EDC, BSBFAI saved part of its
reforestation payments and invested the money in its own com-
munity livelihood projects, including the purchase of several hec-
tares of piñahan (pineapple farm) and talamnan (irrigated rice
paddies), which BSBFAI manages on its own. The capacity building
work of EDC has helped BSBFAI gain recognition as a top perform-
ing people’s organization, which has made it a desired community
partner for other projects. BSBFAI has new projects beginning
now.
3. Expanding incentives and reducing threats

The NGP faces a notable challenge for restoration with indige-
nous species in protected areas, which paradoxically stems from
protected area policies aimed at preventing deforestation. The har-
vest of indigenous species in protected areas is generally prohib-
ited. For planted trees, even for exotic species, there have been
frequent changes in policy regarding their harvest, which has
resulted in a lack of trust among communities who fear they will
not be able to reap the future benefits from a long-term investment
in tree-planting (Pulhin et al., 2006). Protected area policies thus
limit the potential socioeconomic benefit for communities
involved in reforestation compared to other areas where such strict
rules limiting or preventing tree harvesting are not in place. Since
the NGP places emphasis on restoration with indigenous species in
protected areas, the challenge is how to make communities in pro-
tected areas, such as BSBFAI, interested in planting indigenous spe-
cies and protecting them indefinitely, without the prospect of
future harvests. The main incentives for BSBFAI to establish and
maintain its EDC and NGP reforestation sites are the payments
for labor noted above. EDC and NGP projects both offer an addi-
tional incentive mechanism in the form of a retention fee at the
completion of projects for sites that achieve an 85% or better sur-
vival rate. BSBFAI may also harvest fruit from planted fruit trees,
and non-timber forest products such as rattan, which has been
planted between trees in some areas.

EDC has taken steps to address other challenges for successful
restoration with indigenous species in protected areas. For exam-
ple, quality planting material for exotic species is more widely



