










































FRAMEWORK AND  
GUIDELINES ON

 LAND POLICY IN AFRICA

Land Policy in Africa:  A Framework to Strengthen Land Rights, 
Enhance Productivity and Secure Livelihoods

Economic Commission for AfricaAfrican Development BankAfrican Union

How can the land sector play its proper role 
in economic growth, poverty alleviation and 
environmental sustainability, and in promoting 
peace and security in Africa? This Framework and 
Guidelines on Land Policy in Africa, developed by 
the AU-ECA-AfDB Consortium tries to answer this 
question. 

From the perspective of the Framework and 
Guidelines (F&G), land policies should be 
considered a prerequisite for economic growth 
and sustainable human development.  Therefore, 
African governments need to develop holistic 
and comprehensive land policies at national 
level. Such land policies should be based on clear 
understanding of critical issues and challenges 
which must be tackled. The policies need to be 
based on inclusive and participatory approaches. 

However, developing appropriate land policy is not 
an end per se. In order to have a positive impact 
on the livelihoods of poor African people in rural 
and urban areas, the policies need to be effectively 

implemented. Land policy implementation entails 
the translation of the adopted policy into a 
programme of land reform. Based on experiences 
documented across the continent, the F&G provides 
lessons and best practices for effective and efficient 
land policy implementation processes. In this regard, 
African governments need to develop appropriate 
land administration systems, including structures 
and institutions for land rights delivery and land 
governance.

Having been developed through a highly consultative 
process and having been endorsed by the highest 
decision making organs of the African Union, the 
Framework and Guidelines on Land Policy in Africa is 
widely acknowledged in the continent as a valid and 
legitimate tool. However, this is just the beginning: 
the tool needs to be made available and to be used 
by governments and other stakeholders at regional, 
national and local levels where land policies are 
developed and implemented. The implementation 
phase of the F&G is designed to address this crucial 
challenge.



