










































viii

An African Task Force on Land Policy chaired by the late Prof Hastings W.O. Okoth-Ogendo 
(Kenya) provided intellectual, technical and political guidance to the LPI throughout the 
implementation of the road map. Other members of this Task Force were: Prof Ahmed O. 
El-Kholei (Egypt); Mr Kwame Gyan (Ghana); Ms Susan Mbaya (Zimbabwe); Prof Sam Moyo 
(Zimbabwe); Mr Paul Tafam (Cameroon); and Dr Hubert Ouedraogo (Burkina Faso). 

The preparation of the Framework and Guidelines was informed by regional assessment 
studies on land policy that were undertaken in collaboration with Africa’s regional 
economic communities. We are grateful to Ms Margaret Nyirenda and Mr Stephen 
Nanthambwe of the Southern African Development Community (SADC); Mr Pascal 
Moussavou of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS); Dr Chike C. 
Ezeudeh of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS); Mr Mahalmoudou 
Hamadoun Maiga of Comité Permanent Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Sécheresse au Sahel 
(CILSS); Mr Yufnalis Okubo of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD); 
and Mr Bakary Coulibaly of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (CENSAD) for their 
collaboration in the preparation of the regional assessments. The inputs of staff members 
from partner institutions including Dr. Philip Dobie, Ms Verity Nyaga and Dr Eric Patrick of 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Mr Marco Morettini of the European 
Commission, Prof Paul Mathieu, Dr Lamourdia Thiombiano and Mr Meshack Malo of FAO, 
Mr Remy Sietchiping of UN-HABITAT, were instrumental to successful regional activities.

Regional Experts were key to producing regional assessment reports on land policy 
that formed the basis for discussions at the regional consultations. Prof Cherryl Walker 
(South Africa), Mr Simeao Cambaco (Mozambique) and Mr Wolfgang Werner (Namibia) 
undertook the Southern Africa assessment; Mr Eddie Nsamba-Ngayiiya (Uganda), Prof 
Patricia Kameri-Mbote of (Kenya) and Prof J.M. Lusugga Kironde of Tanzania prepared the 
assessment for Eastern Africa; Dr Odame W. Larbi of Ghana, Prof Mariatou Kone of Côte 
d’Ivoire and Dr Adam M. Kandine of Niger conducted the West Africa assessment; Prof Paul 
Tchawa of Cameroon, Prof Kalambaye Lumpungu of the Democratic Republic of Congo 
and Dr Domitien Ndihokubwayo of Burundi undertook the Central Africa assessment; 
while Prof Ahmed O. El-Kholei of Egypt and Dr Lokman Zaibet of Tunisia prepared the 
Northern Africa assessment.

Many thanks go to the governments of Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Namibia 
and Rwanda for hosting the regional consultation workshops. It is commendable that 
representatives from line ministries and departments responsible for land, civil society, 
private sector, research and academia provided useful inputs during the regional 
consultations, which helped to better document realities on the ground with regard to 
the opportunities and challenges of land governance in Africa.

Immense gratitude goes to the Core Drafting Team of the Framework and Guidelines on 
Land Policy in Africa chaired by the late Prof Hastings W.O. Okoth-Ogendo, closely assisted 



