










































ix

by Mr Kwame Gyan, Dr. Joan C. Kagwanja, Ms Susan Mbaya and including Prof Sam Moyo, 
Prof Paul Tchawa, Prof Ahmed O. El-Kholei and Dr Hubert Ouedraogo.

The draft Framework and Guidelines received substantive review by an Expert Consultative 
Team (ECT) which comprised individual land experts as well as representatives of 
stakeholder and partner institutions: Prof J.M. Lusugga Kironde; Prof Cherryl Walker; Dr 
Odame W. Larbi; Mr Ibrahim Njiru Mwathane; Ms Priscilla Achakpa (Women Environmental 
Programme -WEP); Mr Odenda Lumumba (Kenya Land Alliance - KLA); Mr Yufnalis Okubo 
(IGAD); Mr Martin Bwalya (The New Partnership for Africa’s Development -NEPAD); Dr 
Chike C. Ezeudeh (ECOWAS); Mr Stephen Nanthambwe (SADC); Mr Harold Liversage 
(International Fund for Agricultural Development -IFAD); Dr Clarissa Augustinus (United 
Nations Human Settlements Programme -UN-HABITAT); Dr Klaus Deininger (World Bank); 
Prof Paul Mathieu (FAO); Dr Tidiane Ngaido (International Food Policy Research Institute 
-IFPRI); and Mr Hailemariam Hailemeskel (AfDB). Further comments and guidance were 
provided respectively by M. Julian Quan of NRI and Mr Bernard Kioko of AUC.

In addition to the ECT, the draft guidelines was subjected to rigorous review by hundreds 
of stakeholders in Africa who had participated in the regional consultations and other 
LPI processes. In this regard, Action Aid International, United Nations Development Fund 
for Women (UNIFEM) and Urgent Action Fund warrant special mention for organizing 
a consultation at the African Development Forum (ADF) to review the Framework and 
Guidelines through a Women’s Land rights lens.

The LPI Secretariat comprising Dr Hubert Ouedraogo (Lead Land Expert), Ms Atkeyelsh 
Persson (Programme Associate), and Ms Tsedey Merid (Programme Assistant), was 
instrumental in providing technical, programmatic and logistical inputs, for the 
implementation of the LPI activities. 

Significant guidance and support to resource mobilization and financial management 
were provided by Mr Anthony Nwanze and Ms Elsa Gackiero of ECA. 

Many support staff members of the consortium and other partners contributed during 
the various stages of the process including making preparations for and servicing the 
LPI meetings. These were: Ms Rahel Menda, Ms Meskerem Melaku and Mr Gezahegn 
Shiferaw of ECA; Ms Susan Nyinawandoli, Ms Israel Zerom and Mr Yonas Amare of AUC; 
Mr Zithobile Kolweni of UNDP; and Ms Sophia Aberra of FAO.

The development of the Framework and Guidelines would not have been possible 
without the support and collaboration of various donors and development partners who 
provided critical financial and technical support for the realisation of the activities of the 
roadmap. These donors and partners were FAO, IFAD, Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency, the Rockefeller Foundation, UN-HABITAT, UNDP and the World 
Bank. 



