










































xi

Foreword

The Framework and Guidelines on Land Policy is a joint product of the partnership 
and collaborative effort of the African Union Commission (AUC), the UN Economic 
Commission for Africa (ECA) and the African Development Bank (AfDB) to promote 
Africa’s socioeconomic development, through inter alia, agricultural transformation 
and modernisation.  Initiated in 2006, the aim of the Land Policy Initiative (LPI) was 
to examine land policy issues and challenges in Africa with a view to developing a 
framework to strengthen land rights, enhance productivity and improve livelihoods. 

The Framework and Guidelines provides a clear overview of the historical, political, 
economic and social background of the land question in Africa and elaborates on the role 
of land as a valuable natural resource endowment in attaining economic development 
and poverty reduction. Based on lessons and best practices identified in land policy 
development and implementation across Africa, it outlines how the land sector should 
perform its proper role in the development process. The Framework and Guidelines 
promotes the need for a shared vision among all stakeholders of a comprehensive and 
coordinated land policy as a major factor in national development. It urges African 
governments to pay attention to the status of land administration systems, including 
land rights delivery systems and land governance structures and institutions, and to 
ensure adequate budgetary provision to land policy development and implementation. 
Progress will require the development of tracking systems and mechanisms of land 
policy formulation and implementation that will enable African governments learn from 
past successes and setbacks, and make timely readjustments to national land policy 
processes.

This Framework and Guidelines is much more than simply another document on land. 
It reflects a consensus on land issues; and serves as a basis for commitment of African 
governments in land policy formulation and implementation and a foundation for 
popular participation in improved land governance. Its other fundamental purpose is to 
engage development partners in resource mobilization and capacity building in support 
of land policy development and implementation in Africa. 



