










































2

that many African countries have, over time, 
accumulated a multiplicity of sectoral policies 
and laws relating to land, its management 
and use without over-arching policies which 
rationalize, harmonize and clarify the otherwise 
uncoordinated approaches and complex 
interactions between these sectoral laws and 
policies.
 
This is the primary context which justifies a 
pan-African framework to assist member states 
in the process of undertaking or embarking 
upon and harnessing land policy reforms in 
the interests of their national development 
objectives.

1.1.2 The purpose of the Framework and 
Guidelines

Given that context, an attempt is made in this 
Framework and Guidelines to articulate some 
of the principles which should inform the 
development, content and implementation 
of land policies in African member states. 
Specifically the Framework and Guidelines 
seeks to: 

offer a basis for commitment by African a. 
member states to the formulation 
and operationalisation of sound land 
policies as a basis for sustainable human 
development that includes assuring social 
stability, maintaining economic growth 
and alleviating poverty and protecting 
natural resources from degradation and 
pollution. 

promote consensus for shared principles b. 
as the basis for securing access to land 
for all users, enhancing agricultural 
productivity and sustaining livelihoods 

underscore the need for popular c. 
participation in land policy formulation 

and implementation so as to facilitate 
improved governance of land resources 

suggest standards for best practices for d. 
land policy reforms and benchmarks  for 
the performance of land institutions that 
member states can adopt in keeping with 
their respective contexts

articulate a policy framework for e. 
addressing emerging issues and 
anticipating future trends relating to 
land resources, 

provide a basis for more coherent f. 
partnership between states, citizens 
and development partners in land policy 
formulation and implementation on the 
continent 

establish general principles for engaging g. 
development partners for the purposes 
of mobilising resources for building 
capacities for transformative land policy 
reform processes, and 

develop guidelines for regional h. 
convergence on the sustainable 
management and utilization of land and 
associated resources shared by two or 
more member states in various parts of 
Africa 

1.2 The Process of Developing the 
Framework and Guidelines

1.2.1 The beginning of the process

In 2006 the African Union Commission (AUC), 
the UN Economic Commission for Africa 
(ECA) and the African Development Bank 
(AfDB) initiated a joint process of developing 
a framework for land policy and land reforms 
in Africa with a view to strengthening land 
rights, enhancing productivity and securing 



