










































3

livelihoods.  Building upon and complementing 
national and regional processes for land policy 
development and implementation, the process 
was conducted in close collaboration with 
Regional Economic Communities (RECs).  African 
ownership of the process and envisaged end-
product was ascertained through mobilising 
African expertise through the participation of 
African Member States and other African non-
state stakeholders.

1.2.2	The	extent	of	consultation

The first step in the process of developing 
the land policy framework was a consultative 
continental workshop, which took place in 
March 2006 in Addis Ababa.  The workshop 
brought together representatives from African 
governments, RECs, civil society including 
farmers’ organizations, African private sector 
representatives, Centres of Excellence, 
and Development Partners.  The workshop 
established consensus around the elements 
and thematic issues that would characterize 
the framework, the features of a vision and 
guiding principles for the framework, actions 
and sequential activities of a roadmap, needed 
to develop a land policy framework, the roles 
of stakeholders and partners, and strategies 
for resource mobilization.  The outputs of 
the workshop were a background document 
summarizing the main land issues in Africa that 
should be used as the basis for developing a 
preliminary outline of a land policy framework 
for Africa.

In the second step of the process, the RECs 
played a lead role in regional processes.  These 
were successful in raising land policy issues 
that highlighted regional specificities. The RECs 
began by conducting regional assessments  
which resulted in the production of five Regional 
Background Papers highlighting existing 
initiatives and lessons that could enrich the 
framework .  The assessments were followed 
by Regional Consultative Workshops hosted by 
the AU-ECA-AfDB. The workshops in Southern, 
Eastern, West, Central and North Africa were 
held between August 2007 and December 
2008.  Using the background document as 
well as regional assessments as the basis for 
discussion, the consultations in each region 
revisited the preliminary outline developed 
after the 2006 Consultative Workshop in the 
light of regional specificities, initiatives and 
lessons, thereby enriching it.  The regional 
consultations also identified challenges, 
knowledge, institutional and resource gaps as 
well as on-going initiatives to assist in mapping 
out strategies for capacity building and lesson-
sharing activities; that would be vital to the 
implementation of the framework.  The key 
final outcome of the regional consultations 
was thus an enriched draft of the continental 
framework. In addition, regional background 
documents were also developed outlining 
the key elements and processes needed for 
the medium-and long-term implementation 
of the framework. The full extent of regional 
consultations is set out in Box 1 below.



