










































6

true despite the continent’s enormous and 
untapped subterranean resources. 

2.3 The Political Context

2.3.1	Colonial	origins	of	the	land	question

Africa comprises five regions carved out 
into fifty-two countries with diverse political 
histories of colonial rule. The majority of these 
countries were colonized by Britain (through 
direct or indirect rule) others by the French 
(through assimilation strategies) Belgium, 
Portugal and Spain.  German rule in Cameroon, 
Tanzania and Namibia was short-lived, while 
Apartheid South Africa; (itself first colonized in 
the 17th century by Dutch settlers and later by 
the British) also governed Namibia in the 20th 
century.  

European settlers gained control over land 
through “agreements”, conquests and 
appropriation.  Direct control of land and 
engagement in agriculture was prominent in 
Southern Africa (i.e. South Africa, Zimbabwe, 
Namibia) and in North Africa (Egypt, Algeria and 
Libya), Kenya in East Africa, Ivory Coast in West 
Africa, and to a lesser extent in the DRC and 
Cameroon in Central Africa. The consolidation 
of such control and subsequent regulation 
of acquired lands was effected through the 
promulgation of a variety of European laws, 
and establishment of political, administrative 
and economic management systems, which 
were grafted onto a diverse range of indigenous 
economic and cultural practices thus leading to  
dualistic land tenure and land administration 
regimes. 

Independence from colonial rule was staggered 
over time from the late 1950’s through to the 

1990’s, with Zimbabwe, Namibia and South 
Africa coming last.  Thus, the processes of 
nation building, such as, the establishment of 
independent political systems and the design of 
policies and development strategies including 
land reforms and land policy making, were 
staggered as well. Land reforms, especially to 
redress colonially based unequal ownership and 
to rationalize discriminatory land use policies 
and insecure land tenure systems begun in the 
1950s and continued more vigorously from 
the 1960s onwards.  This took the form of 
nationalization of settler and foreign corporate 
lands in Egypt, Algeria, Libya, Tanzania, Zambia, 
Mozambique and Angola. In the former colonial 
‘protectorates’, which faced indirect colonial 
rule alongside cheap labour migrant systems, 
(such as in Botswana, Swaziland, Lesotho and 
Malawi), land expropriation for redistribution 
was used sparingly in the smaller areas of white 
settlement.  Land acquisitions through market-
based compensation, with some finance from 
the former colonial master, were used in the 
1960’s in Kenya, Swaziland and Botswana, and 
in Zimbabwe during the 1980s.  Efforts at the 
reform of land held by indigenous communities 
through a variety of measures including 
individual and group titling or appropriation 
for cash crop production in a number of African 
countries however, have been met with limited 
success as a result of the persistence of social 
and cultural attachment to land and, in some 
cases, contestation and conflict, as has been 
apparent in Kenya, Uganda, Malawi, Zimbabwe, 
Namibia and South Africa. These efforts have 
not, in consequence, adequately restructured 
the dualistic land holding systems resulting 
from colonization, nor have they improved 
government support for the development of 
the disadvantaged indigenous land tenure 
systems.  



