










































7

2.3.2	The	impact	of	political	liberalization

Liberal political reforms and especially the 
demise of military and authoritarian rule 
and the return to multiparty politics in Africa 
leading to changes in state-society relationships 
have in turn created opportunities for new 
approaches to land policy development. 
More specifically the overbearing role of the 
state as owner regulator and user of land 
resources is being increasingly challenged as 
land rights communities, non-state regulatory 
and administrative structures, organs of civil 
society and other public sector groups demand 
involvement in land policy development. 

2.3.3	Land	and	conflict	in	Africa

Despite efforts at the liberalization of political 
space, the struggle for land and natural 
resources remains one of the key factors 
fuelling instability in Africa. In the former 
settler colonies such as Kenya, Zimbabwe and 
South Africa, the failure to resolve historical 
claims arising from colonial expropriations 
compounded by unequal re-distribution of 
land after independence, remains a primary 
source of conflict. In other parts of Africa such 
as the mineral rich countries of Angola, the 
DRC, Southern Sudan, Sierra Leone and Liberia, 
conflicts over land spurred by global commercial 
interests have been intense. In yet others such 
as Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Somalia the 
Central African Republic, the Republic of Congo 
(Brazzaville) and Ivory Coast, persistent conflicts 
over the last two decades have led to large 
numbers of internally displaced persons (IDPs) 
raising complex issues about access to land, 
resettlement and rehabilitation. Moreover, 
these conflicts have, in many countries, led to 
forced evictions and horrific atrocities (including 
genocide) against non-combatants, mainly 
women and children. Thus apart from dealing 
with issues relating to the redress of historical 

injustices and the attainment of social equity, 
land policy development and reform must 
address the problem of conflict prevention and 
the restoration of peace and security in Africa.

2.4 The Economic Context

2.4.1 Land in the agricultural economy

The importance of land in development in Africa 
is underlined by the fact that approximately 
60% of the population derives its livelihood 
and income mainly from farming, livestock 
production, and related activities. Indeed the 
contribution of the agricultural sector to the 
GDP in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa 
exceeds 25% and is as high as over 40% in 
countries such as the Central African Republic, 
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, 
Guinea Bissau, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Tanzania 
and Togo. In addition livestock production is 
an important activity in the Sahellian countries 
and in the Horn of Africa. 

The contribution of agriculture and livestock 
production to African economies could 
be considerably enhanced through radical 
restructuring of a number of constraints. The 
first is the relatively low levels of agricultural 
productivity in terms of land and labour in many 
countries which have led to overdependence on 
imports for food security. The second is equally 
low levels of mechanization especially in terms 
of irrigation development resulting in sub-
optimal use of the continent’s land resources. 
The third is the persistence of colonial policies 
that discriminated against the vast majority of 
African farmers and which continues to inhibit 
the growth of the small farm sector in terms of 
investment and infrastructure. Further, macro-
economic stabilization policies since the 1990’s, 
externally-oriented trade liberalization, and 



