










































8

the deregulation of domestic markets, have 
restricted the scope and pace of improved land 
utilization among Africa’s predominantly small 
farmers, while large-scale commercial farming 
dominated by elites and foreign landowners is 
growing.

2.4.2 Land in other sectors of the 
economy

Beyond agriculture, land continues to be a 
significant factor in Africa’s economy through 
its contribution to other sectors. In countries 
such as South Africa, Mauritius, Kenya, Egypt, 
Tunisia and Morocco, economic diversification 
has occurred towards tourism, manufacturing 
and services, while the economies of others 
such as Sudan, Angola, Libya and the DRC 
are increasingly dependent on oil and 
mineral revenues. In yet other countries 
such as Zimbabwe, Namibia and Botswana, 
nature conservancies and woodlands claim a 
substantial proportion of the land demand. 

In addition, the process of urbanization, 
which is examined elsewhere in this chapter, 
is creating new and novel demands on land 
and land related resources for engagement in 
more sophisticated economic activities such 
as the provision of recreation, entertainment 
and catering services irrespective of residential 
or urban settlement patterns. This new and 
emerging service economy is becoming an 
important contributor to the GDP of many 
countries.

2.5 The Social and Cultural Context

2.5.1 Land and spirituality

To the vast majority of societies in Africa land 
is regarded not simply as an economic or 
environmental asset, but as a social, cultural 

and ontological resource. Land remains an 
important factor in the construction of social 
identity, the organization of religious life and 
the production and reproduction of culture. 
The link across generations is ultimately defined 
by the complement of land resources which 
families, lineages and communities share and 
control. Indeed land is fully embodied in the 
very spirituality of society. These are dimensions 
which land policy development must address if 
prescriptions for change are to be internalized. 

2.5.2	Land	and	gender	relations

It must be conceded, however that despite 
the reverence which surrounds land and land 
relations in Africa, the system of patriarchy 
which dominates social organization has 
tended to discriminate against women when 
it comes to ownership and control of land 
resources. This has been re-enforced, first, by 
imported land law that has tended to cement 
the system of patriarchy by conferring title and 
inheritance rights upon male family members 
on the theory that women, especially married 
women can only access land through their 
husbands or male children and second by “claw-
back” clauses in many African constitutions and 
the African Charter on Human and Peoples 
Rights (ACHPR) permitting discrimination on 
matters of personal law which often operate 
against women’s right to equal treatment 
before the law. If law and policy are to redress 
gender imbalances in land holding and use, it 
is necessary to deconstruct, reconstruct and 
reconceptualise existing rules of property 
in land under both customary and statutory 
law in ways that strengthen women’s access 
and control of land while respecting family 
and other social networks. This would also be 
consistent with commitments made by African 
states as evidenced in the AU’s 2003 Maputo 
protocol to the ACHPR on the Rights of Women 



