










































9

in Africa and the 2004 Solemn	Declaration	on	
Gender	Equality	in	Africa	both of which call for 
action to address gender inequalities including 
women’s unequal access to land.  This is all the 
more important as women remain the primary 
users of agricultural land in most African 
communities.

2.5.3	Other	forms	of	marginalization

Beyond the frequently acknowledged 
inequalities due to race, class and gender, the 
marginalization of particular ethnic groups with 
respect to access to adequate land remains a 
perpetual source of conflict. The marginalization 
of certain categories of indigenous people such 
as the San of Botswana; the Herero of Namibia; 
the Bakola, Bagyeli and Batwa of the countries 
of Central Africa; and the Ogiek of Kenya, has 
become contentious. Land policy reforms must 
also address these concerns.

2.6 The Demographic Context

2.6.1	Population	growth	and	migration	

Through a combination of factors including 
population growth, migration and urbanization, 
the overall per capita availability of land 
(particularly agricultural land) is decreasing 
in many countries. In a number of countries, 
such as in West Africa, as much as 50% to 75% 
of the populations live on about 25% of the 
national land along the coastal zones, leading 
to much higher densities in these areas. At 
current urban growth rates exceeding 3.5% per 
annum in many countries, this trend is likely to 
exert severe pressure on urban and peri-urban 
infrastructure and services. 

2.6.2	Urbanization

Much of the African continent is still in the early 

stages of urbanization with only 38% of the 
people classified as urban, the rate of change of 
this transition is currently and will continue for 
several decades to be the highest in the world. 
By 2050, for example, half of Africa’s population, 
or at least 1.2 billion people, will live in urban 
areas thus accounting for one quarter of the 
world’s urban population. Much of this growth 
will be evident in Africa’s capital cities where an 
aggregate of over 10% of the urban population 
of most countries often reside. Although the 
extent of urban concentration will continue 
to vary from country to country with South 
Africa, Zambia, Mauritius, Gabon and Egypt 
already at between 40% and 58% and others 
generally below 20% of their total populations, 
urbanization throughout Africa is still essentially 
driven by large scale migration from the 
country side as a result of a variety of factors 
including poverty, famine, drought, disaster, 
conflict and the general perception that the 
cities offer a better quality of life. An important 
factor to note, however, is that urbanization 
in Africa will continue to be characterized by 
informal settlement developments where over 
60% of urban residents currently live. This is a 
phenomenon which will continue to compound 
inequalities in access to development resources 
in these areas; a factor which in turn has a 
direct impact on social and economic stability 
particularly in primary cities that are important 
drivers in national economies.   

Finally a persistent phenomenon in the urban 
areas is the systematic discrimination against 
women in education, housing, access to land 
and opportunities to pursue basic livelihood 
skills despite the existence of formal gender-
neutral laws. Much of this is as a result of social 
realignments in urban politics and economy 
and the primary perception of women’s roles as 
being mainly dependants. Although there are 
indications that many women are beginning to 



