










































10

take advantage of opportunities and challenges 
presented by urbanization, progress towards 
active participation in urban politics and 
economy remains relatively slow.

2.7 Emerging Global and Strategic 
Issues

2.7.1 An overview

A number of changes in the global environment 
politics and economy are beginning to exert 
new and significant impacts on Africa’s land 
resources. The most visible of these are in 
response to changes in the global ecosystem, 
demand for energy supplies and rapid increase 
in foreign direct investment (FDI). An important 
challenge for the state in Africa will be to put in 
place adequate policies to ensure that the risks 
associated with these changes and, in particular 
the risk of uncompensated loss of land rights by 
the poor are avoided or effectively managed.

2.7.2 Global climate change 

The impact of global warming on climate 
change is expected to affect land use systems 
in Africa, although its extent and magnitude 
is still unfolding. Nevertheless direct impacts 
such as reduced availability and scarcity of 
water, saline intrusion, increased temperatures, 
biodiversity loss and desertification as a 
consequence of more frequent droughts, are 
now known to reduce productivity of land 
and hence likely to accelerate poverty. In as 
much as the African continent contributes 
least to green house gas emissions (GHCs) 
which are primarily responsible for global 
warming, the overall impact of climate change 
on the continent’s ecosystems will continue 
to be disproportionately severe. Land policy 
reforms will need, therefore, to pay particular 

attention to the design and implementation of 
mitigation and adaptation measures, including 
the mobilization of capacity to manage long-
term implications of such change. For coastal 
countries evidence already indicates that rising 
sea levels will require relocation of populations, 
innovative land use planning and massive 
land acquisitions accompanied by large scale 
infrastructure and service delivery not to 
mention the costs associated with the flow of 
“climate” refugees into the contiguous urban 
areas. 

2.7.3 Food supplies, prices and changing 
land uses

The recent surge in world food prices and food 
supply bottlenecks have tended to affect Africa 
the most, given the continent’s current food 
production deficits and increasing dependence 
on imports and food aid.  Rising food prices are 
the result of complex interactions between a 
number of major factors including the diversion 
of land resources and farm inputs  towards the 
production of food grains and oil seed for agro-
fuel stock feeds in North America, and Europe, 
the failure of African countries to pursue 
policies that promote increased agricultural 
productivity and persistent inequities in the 
global trade system. Land policy reforms will 
have to address these issues.

2.7.4 The new scramble for Africa’s land 
resources

The first ‘scramble for Africa’ which took place 
in the 19th century involved Belgium, France, 
Britain Portugal and Italy carving out sections 
of the continent and sharing the spoils. Since 
then these nations have receded in political 
strength in comparison to the United States  
of America and China. What has not changed, 
however, is the importance of Africa to western 



