










































11

economies by virtue of its rich endowment 
in natural resources. In recent times, the 
significance of bio-fuels, minerals and oil has 
gained prominence. Increased oil production 
from existing discoveries in African countries 
has taken on a new strategic significance in the 
light of the unpredictability of future Middle 
East oil supplies, the USA’s apparent insatiable 
appetite for oil, and China’s colossal energy and 
raw material requirements. The accelerated 
exploitation of resources by, together with the 
establishment of, industries and processing 
infrastructure in these countries, have led 
directly  to a ‘new scramble’ for Africa’s land 
resources..

While this new scramble for Africa is often 
discussed primarily in the context of valuable 
mineral endowments, the concept has 
become more widespread, as demonstrated in 
relation to demand for land for a wide range 
of investments in timber, tourism, commercial 
development, and lately food production for 
consumption abroad. The question to be asked 
is whether these foreign demands can be met 
while observing sustainability guidelines and 
without marginalizing the land rights of African 
communities. 

2.7.5	Regional	co-operation	and	
integration

Increasingly African countries are embarking 
upon regional cooperation and integration, 
under the auspices of various pan African 
and sub-Regional organizations.  A growing 
number of cross-border developments point 
to the need for co-operation over many 

issues including migration, the movement 
of pastoral communities, refugees, trans-
boundary ecological stresses (land and water 
degradation, desertification, and deforestation). 
Thus RECs currently have agreements on the 
management of shared water, forest resources 
and desertification. Civil society organizations 
are also mobilizing in a bid to influence land and 
resource management policies across national 
boundaries. Regrettably, however, these 
ongoing regional cooperation and integration 
initiatives have not resulted in binding 
convergences in land policy frameworks, 
processes and management systems. 

2.8 Implications for the Role of 
Land in the Development 
Process

The contextual issues set out above are 
important in a number of ways. First, they 
enable governments to identify the critical 
questions and challenges which must be tackled 
and opportunities which must be seized if the 
land sector is to play its primary role in Africa’s 
development process. That clearly must be 
the starting point in any meaningful process of 
policy development and reform. Second, they 
provide a basis for realistic policy development 
and reform in the land sector. Third, they point 
to the fact that although national strategies on 
how to resolve these issues may vary, there 
are important commonalities in terms of their 
origin and characteristics which make the 
sharing of experiences across countries useful 
and even critical. These are elaborated further 
in the chapters next following.



