










































14

the attainment of the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs) among which are the eradication 
of extreme hunger, poverty reduction and 
gender equality. These call for land policies 
which support a wide range of economic, social 
and political objectives including the prevention 
of conflicts and their prompt and effective 
resolution through mutually acceptable dispute 
processing mechanisms. When acceptable to a 
broad stakeholder base effective land policies 
will also play a role in peace-building by inspiring 
a higher degree of trust in regulatory systems 
among various interests competing for scarce 
land resources.

3.1.2	 Integrating	land	issues	into	decision-
making processes

The administration of land resources has an 
important bearing on the democratic process.  
Structures governing access, control and 
management of land are as much about the 
consolidation of democracy as they are about 
asset stewardship. Linked to this is the need to 
integrate land administration and management 
into systems of governance at all levels. Best 
practice points to the fact that devolution 
of power over land management and the 
decentralization of the delivery of land services 
to local land governance institutions are key 
considerations if inefficiency and corruption are 
to be exposed and addressed. This orientation 
will require readjustments or even fundamental 
reshaping of economic and political decision-
making processes.

Further policy making processes should promote 
holistic approaches instead of the tendency to 
pursue sector specific paths or foci to policy 
development with little or no co-ordination or 
harmonization with other sectors and cross-
cutting policies. This would entail ensuring that 

all necessary linkages within and contributions 
of land related issues to other development 
processes are accounted for. The integration of 
land policy with natural resource management 
strategies and poverty reduction programmes 
would be of particular – but not exclusive – 
importance in this regard.

3.1.3	Acknowledging	the	legitimacy	of	
indigenous land rights systems

A major continual challenge which evolving land 
policies have to face, especially in sub-Saharan 
Africa, is the need to blend tradition and 
modernity in land rights regimes. In this respect 
land policies should seek to remove age-old 
rigidities in traditional structures and systems 
which tend to discriminate against women 
while at the same time building on and thereby 
improving indigenous tenure arrangements. In 
thus acknowledging the legitimacy of indigenous 
land rights, land policy processes must also 
recognize the role of local and community-based 
land administration/management institutions 
and structures, alongside those of the State.  
Land policy processes should also seek to 
provide for the necessary interface between 
state and indigenous systems, particularly with 
regard to the certification of land rights, the 
empowerment of decentralized institutions in 
land rights administration, and the management 
of land as a resource at the local level. Colonial 
legacies which tended to denigrate indigenous 
land rights systems and suppress and sabotage 
their evolution and which ignored community 
land administration structures must now give 
way to new and innovative policies including 
the provision of statutory frameworks for the 
documentation and codification of informal land 
rights regimes. It is encouraging that a number 
of African countries including Ethiopia, Southern 
Sudan, Ghana and the pastoral communities of 
the Sahel are already moving in this direction.



