










































15

3.1.4 Strengthening the land rights of 
women

Throughout Africa, agricultural production 
and preservation of land resources is primarily 
the responsibility of women and children. It is 
still generally the case, however, that gender 
discrimination in access to land resources is 
a serious problem particularly in rural Africa. 
This is both undemocratic and a constraint 
on economic development. Better and more 
productive use of land requires that the land 
rights of women be strengthened through a 
variety of mechanisms including the enactment 
of legislation that allows women to enforce 
documented claims to land within and outside 
marriage. This should come hand in hand with 
equal rights for women to inherit and bequeath 
land, co-ownership of registered land by spouses 
and the promotion of women’s participation in 
land administration structures. To ensure full 
enjoyment of land rights, these measures must 
be part of an ideology which removes issues 
regarding the land rights of women from the 
private sphere of marriage and family, and places 
them in the public domain of human rights.

3.2 Mainstreaming Land in Poverty 
Reduction Programmes

3.2.1 The persistence of poverty in Africa

Poverty, which refers to an inability to satisfy basic 
needs, is widespread in both urban and rural 
settlements in Africa.  Equally distributed and 
effectively managed, land can be instrumental 
in eradicating poverty.  Securing land tenure, 
redistributing land, to those in need, improving 
access to land resources and spreading land 
related services can also contribute to poverty 
eradication. This will require a number of specific 
policy strategies.

3.2.2	Enhancing	access	to	land	through	
tenure reform 

Provision of secure access to land through 
various forms of tenure will facilitate economic 
opportunity and livelihood security for all 
land users. Tenure reforms accompanied 
where necessary with programmes of land 
redistribution will improve access to land and 
confer security for vulnerable groups, especially 
women who constitute most of the urban and 
rural poor. Addressing the issue of tenure 
security is particularly important if the cycle 
of dependency and systemic and institutional 
poverty among these groups is to be broken 
and if women are to be protected against the 
tendency towards high risk behaviours especially 
in times of crises caused by pandemics such as 
HIV/AIDS and persistent conflicts in Africa. The 
choice of which tenure systems to adopt will 
depend on the specific context and production 
system in operation in each country.

3.2.3	Balancing	pro-poor	priorities	with	
market	orientation

Many African countries perceive an apparent 
contradiction between the pursuit of pro-
poor strategies of land development on the 
one hand and market-driven options on the 
other. Mainstreaming land issues in poverty 
reduction strategies requires that these 
apparently inconsistent objectives be engaged 
and rationalized. In particular, there is need 
to ensure that adequate measures are put in 
place to ensure that increased market-driven 
policies of land development do not expose 
vulnerable groups, particularly women, to 
further marginalization through speculation 
and costly land rights transfer systems. 



