










































16

3.3 Making Agriculture an Engine 
of Growth

3.3.1	Creating	an	enabling	environment	
for agriculture

In most African countries, agriculture is the 
main source of livelihood for the majority 
of the population and major contributor to 
economic growth.  Land is important for all 
forms of agricultural production, including 
cereals, horticultural products, livestock, 
fishing, and hunting.  Land is also a major 
factor in the processing and marketing of the 
products derived from these activities. All 
African countries still have traditional systems 
for the management and administration of 
land.  These systems which are not always 
homogenous even within the same country, 
can, more or less, be either conducive or 
counterproductive to effective management of 
land for agriculture.  A number of improvements 
in the land sector will be necessary to ensure 
that an enabling environment is created for 
agricultural  development.

3.3.2 Clarifying property rights in 
agriculture

One such improvement is to ensure that the  
systems of property under which land is held 
and used is clarified for the variety of agricultural 
forms and participants in that sector. This is 
crucial not only for rural farmers, particularly 
women who produce most of Africa’s food 
crops and whose access to land is based on 
various indigenous tenure systems, but also 
for foreign or local commercial investors, 
some of whom seek to engage in large scale 
operations (including extensive irrigation 
networks). The ability to secure access to land 
resources through a variety of tenure systems 

that guarantee returns for short or long term 
investments is important for the improvement 
of agricultural productivity in general and food 
security in particular. Clear property rights in 
agriculture also have the potential of increasing 
revenues through taxation and enhancement 
of agricultural exports.

3.3.3	Promoting	the	development	of	land	
rights transfer systems and markets

Yet another improvement is to create an 
enabling environment for the transfer and 
exchange of land rights either formally through 
documented transactions or informally through 
intra-family or community arrangements. 
Promoting the development of robust land 
rights transfer systems and markets offering 
various types of rights (whether primary or 
secondary) will expand opportunities for 
the acquisition of  land resources for many 
agricultural users engaged in large or small 
scale, formal or informal operations. Properly 
regulated, this kind of flexibility can be of great 
value to those whose land rights are precarious 
especially women and people living in informal 
settlements in the agricultural or urban sectors. 
That flexibility will need to be accompanied by 
the support services infrastructure, particularly 
low-cost credit facilities, which will enable such 
groups take full advantage of the market.

3.4 Managing Land for Other Uses

3.4.1 Land needs for other uses

Beyond agriculture, land is an important 
factor for many other uses that are increasing 
in importance to the development of African 
economies. These include manufacturing, 
mining, energy development, the development 
of physical infrastructure in the rural areas, 
the management of sustainable urbanization, 



