










































17

and tourism. These uses require large fiscal, 
technological and human investments, which 
are often provided by foreign investors or 
international financing. If those investing in 
these activities are to use land in a manner that 
is environmentally sustainable and cost-effective 
government policies will have to be such as to 
guarantee net gains for African populations.

3.4.2 Land needs for manufacturing

The provision of land for Africa’s growing 
manufacturing sector often involves expansion 
at the expense of urban agriculture and other 
land uses including settlement in peri-urban 
in zones. This usually involves compulsory 
acquisition of land held under indigenous 
tenure and its conversion to statutory regimes 
after compensation is paid. Such expansion also 
involves relocation of informal settlements in 
those areas. In addition, manufacturing can be 
a stationary source of air and water pollution 
and the discharge of solid and liquid wastes 
which are hazardous to the environment. Land 
policy must address these issues if a proper 
balance is to be struck between investment 
in manufacturing and the requirements of 
human health and safety, and environmental 
protection.

3.4.3 Land needs for mining 

Africa is blessed with a wide range of mineral 
deposits which often attract land concessions 
for extraction.  Many specialized multinational 
companies are, in consequence, attracted to 
Africa for this purpose.   Exploring these minerals 
has not, however, been without problems, 
particularly in rural areas.   In several African 
countries, the failure of expected direct benefits 
to materialize is causing tension between local 
communities and mining companies.  Questions 
relating to compensation for land lost, 
resettlement of displaced people, reparations 

for environmental damage (especially in cases 
of surface mining) and the sharing of revenues 
accruing from mining operations, must all be 
properly addressed in land policy reforms.

3.4.4 Land needs for energy development

Energy development has become an important 
economic activity in many African countries. This 
includes the exploration and extraction of oil, 
gas, and geo-thermal resources, the harnessing 
of hydrological wind, and to some extent solar 
power as well as bio-fuel production. Most of 
this activity is driven by foreign investors and 
is geared towards the export rather than local 
market. Energy development often involves 
the relocation of human settlements to create 
buffer zones resulting in significant loss of 
land to and social dislocation of agricultural 
communities. These outcomes have raised 
serious concerns about the capacity of many 
countries to meet their internal agriculture 
food production requirements as land is taken 
out and the ecological trade-offs involved in the 
scramble by foreign investors for land for such 
activities.

3.4.5 Land needs for planning and 
infrastructure in the rural areas

The development of rural areas remains an 
important policy objective for African countries 
especially those faced with post-conflict 
reconstruction and resettlement. Substantial 
investment will, in particular, be required for 
systematic regional planning involving the 
rationalization of land uses for an efficient 
delivery of services including the acquisition 
of land for relocation of existing populations, 
reservation of easements and development of 
the physical infrastructure necessary for faster 
development in these areas. These are issues 
which land policy development must adequately 
address.



