










































18

3.4.6 Land needs for sustainable 
urbanization

The fact that the African region is in the process 
of rapid urbanization presents special challenges 
requiring systematic local planning, provision of 
housing (or shelter), and service delivery. A key 
goal, therefore, is to work towards interventions 
involving, inter alia, the provision, in properly 
planned communities, of affordable and legally 
secure land and housing (or shelter) rights, and 
access to complementary services including 
water and electricity irrespective of tenure 
and structure status. This will entail a range 
of interventions designed to respond to the 
variegated nature of African urban settlements, 
rationalize public sector management, lower 
entry costs, and improve the overall quality of 
life, such as the design of flexible development 
control requirements, introduction of property 
taxes (where appropriate), and good and 
socially inclusive urban governance. These 
interventions will be critical not only within 
metropolitan boundaries but also in peri-urban 
areas where the greatest unplanned change 
takes place often on high potential agricultural 
land.

3.4.7 Land needs for tourism

Tourism is an important revenue earner for 
many African countries. The development of 
this industry is however complicated by the fact 
that the facilities which are required are often 
located in coastal and dry-land areas which are 
already hosts to significant human settlements. 
In addition, tourism is a delicate industry 
which requires systematic land use planning 
and service infrastructure to avoid ecological 
and other forms of environmental damage, 
and adverse social and cultural impacts. Today 
many African countries are engaged in the 
implementation of principles of sustainable 

tourism including eco-tourism, community 
participation in wildlife management and 
revenue sharing. These developments have 
the potential of reducing some of the conflicts 
arising from contestation over the land between 
the industry and other social and economic 
uses. They also require extensive investments 
for the benefit of local communities if the 
participation of such communities is to be 
meaningful and mutually beneficial. 

3.5 Protecting Natural Resources 
and Ecosystems

3.5.1 The state of Africa’s natural 
resources and ecosystems

Africa still has a rich heritage of natural and 
ecological resources. These comprise untapped 
minerals, dense tropical rain forests, some of 
the highest equatorial mountains, abundant 
wildlife, unique biological diversity and massive 
freshwater reserves in rivers, lakes and wetlands 
even though the continent also has some of 
the driest deserts in its northern and southern 
regions. Many of these resources are, however, 
not evenly distributed. For example, more than 
20% of Africa’s forests are located in one country, 
the DRC and most of the fresh water reserves 
are found mainly in the Congo, Niger, Nile and 
Zambezi basins. Because these resources and 
ecosystems remain central to development 
in Africa, strong systems of land governance 
rooted in the principles of sustainability will be 
critical in an effort to ensure their protection 
and renewability. Deliberate steps will also be 
necessary to protect and preserve indigenous 
knowledge systems that have accumulated 
over generations in support of these resources 
and ecosystems.



