










































19

3.5.2	Protecting	forests	and	associated	
ecosystems

Forests and associated ecosystems provide 
many African households with sustenance.  
In addition they play a significant role in 
combating systemic global environmental 
challenges, such as climate change and loss 
of biodiversity. In recent times, however, 
Africa’s forests and associated ecosystems 
have been subjected to destruction under 
various types of pressure including civil wars, 
population growth, commercial harvesting of 
wood products, agricultural expansion, fuel 
wood demand, livestock grazing and other 
competing land uses. Nonetheless, since the 
1992 Earth Summit and following the World 
Summit for Sustainable Development in 2002 
many African countries have been actively 
involved in protecting forests and planning for 
their regeneration through a variety of schemes 
including soil stabilization, tree plantations and 
agro forestry.

3.5.3	Protecting	coastal	and	marine	
ecosystems 

An issue which is closely related to urbanization 
is that of growing human settlements in coastal 
zones. In these areas where ecological systems 
are relatively fragile, rapid urban growth 
enhances the risks of environmental damage, 
erosion and pollution. Demand for infrastructure 
combines with tourism to put these ecosystems 
under pressure leading, in many respects to 
loss of land by local communities. In some 
of East Africa’s coastal areas land is being 
reclaimed and coastal wetlands drained. In the 
Seychelles for example, coastal sand dunes are 
now being used for construction and land is 
being reclaimed from the sea with irreparable 
damage to reefs and wetlands as well as to 
marine eco-systems. There is need for states 

to undertake land policies which provide 
strong regulatory frameworks for responding 
to human settlement needs without causing 
irreparable damage to Africa’s coastline.

3.5.4	Protecting	grasslands	and	pastoral	
ecosystems

Although human population densities in 
grasslands and pastoral ecosystems remain 
relatively low when compared to the medium 
and high potential agricultural areas, and urban 
settlements, these ecosystems typically support 
a vast amount of livestock and wildlife resources 
which contribute significantly to the economies 
of many countries. Today, these ecosystems 
are under threat from several factors, including 
creeping desertification resulting from global 
climate change, invasion by agricultural 
communities and a long tradition of neglect 
in the national development policies of many 
countries. As a result the valuable contribution 
of grasslands and pastoral ecosystems to 
economies including as reservoirs for wildlife 
and biodiversity is slowly receding. This is often 
exacerbated by outmoded stock management 
and environmental practices. The protection of 
pastoral ecosystems will require policies that 
address issues of tenure security, the role of 
pastoral communities in pastoral management, 
guarantee equal access to pastoral resources for 
women, establish processes for the resolution 
of cross-boundary disputes, and improve 
technologies of resource use.

3.5.5	Protecting	water	resources

Africa’s rivers, lakes, wetlands and other 
water bodies are a source of sustenance for 
human settlements as well as agriculture and 
livestock. Although fresh-water demand for 
a variety of uses (including agriculture and 
urban services) is increasing exponentially, 
the rate of regeneration (including recycling 



