










































20

of wastewater) is well below the continent’s 
future needs. Contributing factors include 
changes in the global hydro-meteorological 
cycle, rapid deforestation pollution and siltation 
of fresh water bodies. Further deterioration in 
Africa’s water balance is likely to have adverse 
effects not only on agricultural land use but 
also on energy production, urban and industrial 
development. A comprehensive approach to 
land policy development must therefore include 
measures for the protection, development and 
conservation of these resources. Attention will 
also need to be paid to issues concerning the 
management of trans-border water resources.

3.6 Developing Effective Land 
Administration Systems

3.6.1	The	state	of	land	administration	in	
Africa

For land to play its primary role in national and 
regional development in Africa, attention will 
need to be focused, as a matter of urgency on 
the state of land administration systems. There 
are two aspects to this issue, namely; the state 
of land rights delivery and the efficiency and 
efficacy of the laws, structures and institutions 
for land governance. Both aspects are in dire 
need of reform.

3.6.2 Reform of land rights delivery 
systems

Land rights delivery systems comprise 
those processes that are concerned with 
ascertainment, demarcation, survey, 
registration, and documentation of land 
rights and systematic tracking of land rights 
transactions. In many African countries, these 
systems are in various conditions of disuse 
and mismanagement and are largely paper-

based and manually operated. Further many 
are generally inaccessible and expensive to the 
ordinary land using public. These will require 
not merely redesign but also technological 
upgrading including the establishment of 
computerized Land Information Systems (LIS) 
for faster and more efficient delivery. In addition 
land delivery systems may also need to be 
privatized or out-sourced so as to liberate the 
provision of services from complex government 
bureaucracies.

3.6.3 Reform of land governance 
institutions

An important factor in land administration 
is to foster good governance of land, natural 
resources and processes of land use change. 
“Land governance” refers to the processes by 
which decisions regarding access to, and use 
of, land are made, the manner in which those 
decisions are implemented, and the way in 
with conflicting interests in land are resolved 
or reconciled. Land governance is thus a 
techno-legal, procedural and political exercise. 
This is because the process of allocation and 
enjoyment of land rights cannot be separated 
from the civil, political and human rights, of the 
citizenry and are dependent on the political, 
administrative and professional will to ensure 
fair treatment and equal opportunities for all. 
In addition because land governance entails 
control over land rights it is, in many African 
countries, a means of accumulating and 
dispensing political and economic power and 
privilege through patronage, nepotism and 
corruption. 

Over the past two decades, many African 
countries have put in place a wide range of 
new laws and institutions especially in the 
field of environmental governance without 
proper rationalization or harmonization with 



