










































24

management of the environment. Land policies 
will contribute to the realization of those 
development goals and commitments.

4.1.3	On	fundamental	aspirations

Equitable access to land, secure land rights, 
gender equity, improved governance in the 
land sector and reduction of land related 
conflicts, are fundamental aspirations of 
African people as together they pave the way to 
secure livelihoods and prosperity. Land is also 
an important resource for the development of 
other sectors of the economy, in addition to 
being part of the cultural heritage and social 
identity of Africa peoples. These are aspirations 
which land policies across the continent must 
reflect.

4.2 Developing a Vision for Land 
Policy Development

4.2.1 The need for a shared vision

In order for the African Union to assist member 
countries in addressing land issues that underpin 
the sustainable and inclusive development of 
the continent there is need for all stakeholders 
and the continent’s development partners to 
have a shared vision regarding the need for land 
policy development as an important process 
in national development. In articulating that 
vision, this Framework and Guidelines seeks to 
ensure that the potential of land is fully realized 
in support of the continent’s development 
agenda.

4.2.2 The basis of the vision

The vision deriving from this Framework and 
Guidelines is therefore based on the emerging 
consensus on the need for comprehensive land 
policy development as identified through the 

regional consultations documented in Chapter 
Two, the development goals undertaken and 
commitments made by African nations, and the 
general aspirations of African peoples regarding 
the centrality of land in economy and society. 

4.2.3 Vision statement

On that basis, African governments will seek 
to develop land policies in a manner that is 
inclusive and responsive to the needs of all 
land users, contribute to political stability, 
promote gender equity, foster the reduction of 
conflict, enhance the sustainable management 
of natural resources, ensure orderly urban 
development, and which put all stakeholders 
on the path to higher economic growth and a 
better quality of life.

4.3 The Status of Land Policy 
Development in Africa 

4.3.1 The importance of land policy 
development

That land policy development has already 
become a major item in Africa’s economic 
and political reconstruction agenda is no 
longer in doubt. Central to that exercise is the 
conviction that past policies, many of which 
have been ad hoc or sector specific have failed 
to resolve fundamental problem underlying the 
sustainable development of the land economy 
and those of related sectors.

4.3.2 An assessment of progress

This is evident in the fact that in the past two 
decades alone a large number of countries 
have completed the review and assessment 
of the performance of their land sectors and 
formulated new policies for reform. These 



