










































25

include, but is not limited to, Algeria, Libya, 
Egypt, and Tunisia (North Africa); Benin, Mali, 
Niger, Burkina Faso, and Ghana (West Africa); 
Rwanda and Tanzania (East Africa); and 
Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, 
South Africa, Zambia, and Zimbabwe (Southern 
Africa). Many other countries including 
Mauritania (North Africa); Sierra Leone 
and Liberia (West Africa); Angola, Lesotho, 
Madagascar, and Swaziland (Southern Africa); 
and Kenya, Southern Sudan, and Uganda (East 
Africa) are currently undertaking comprehensive 
review of their own land policies. Although 
the countries not mentioned here have not 
undertaken comprehensive or systematic 
reviews in the past two decades, it is important 
to note that many of them have indeed been 
engaged in significant reforms or enacted land 
laws embodying the overall policy priorities in 
their various land sectors. Throughout Africa, 
therefore, there is no doubting the need to 
inform land related legislation or institution-
building with an assessment of policy concerns 
in that sector. What the vision statement set 
out above offers is a set of parameters, drawn 
from emerging best practices, within which the 
comprehensive and systematic development of 
new or revision of existing land policies, laws, 
and institutions ought to occur. 

4.4 Challenges to Comprehensive 
Land Policy Development

4.4.1 Important lessons learnt 

An assessment of processes in countries that 
have attempted comprehensive or systematic 
review of their land sectors suggest that 
there are a number of challenges that must 
be overcome before adequate land policies 
can be developed. These challenges are of a 
conceptual, technical and operational nature. 

African countries will need to formulate clear 
strategies to overcome these challenges before 
policy development or revision can begin. 
Although such challenges are many, only four 
important ones are identified here.

4.4.2 Low levels of stakeholder and civil 
society involvement

The first is relatively low levels of stakeholder 
and civil society involvement.  Despite evidence 
of community participation in some countries, 
the state has generally played the dominant role 
in driving and shaping land policy formulation.  
In addition, inputs from stakeholders and civil 
society to land policy development have all too 
frequently been ignored or at least not been 
taken fully into consideration.

4.4.3 Sectoral focus to policy 
development

The second is that land policy development has 
tended to follow sectoral paths or foci or to be 
sector-driven with little or no co-ordination or 
harmonization with policies regarding other 
sectors. As a result land policies have failed 
to provide broader ranging prescriptions for 
the management of cross-cutting issues such 
as those impinging on the environment and 
poverty reduction.

4.4.4 Inability to provide for adequate 
budgetary	allocations

The third is that African countries have not 
always been able to make provision for adequate 
budgetary allocations to underwrite the cost of 
land policy development and implementation 
(including capacity gap assessments, 
monitoring and evaluation and medium to 
long term strategies and programmes to deal 
with capacity constraints). Many countries 
have tended to place too much reliance on 



