










































26

donor support for policy development, thereby 
jeopardizing the ownership and sustainability 
of the entire reform enterprise, especially 
when donor funds dwindle as a result of donor 
fatigue or otherwise become unreliable.

4.4.5	Inadequate	human	and	institutional	
capacity

The fourth is that many African countries 
sometimes have no capacity to design and 
undertake comprehensive policy development. 
This often means that what counts as national 
policy is little more than the desk-top product 
of bureaucrats or consultants assigned to 
produce position papers for land ministries 
or government departments. Such exercises 
frequently produce documents which do not 
identify fully the fundamental land questions 
which policy development should address or 
make prescriptions which are unacceptable to 
the broad land using public. 

4.5 Appropriate Strategies for 
Land Policy Development

4.5.1 Clarifying roles in land policy 
development

Emerging best practices suggest, that the 
development of appropriate land policies require 
that the interests and roles of all stakeholders 
in the land sector and, in particular, indigenous 
institutions, the land using public and civil 
society organizations be first clarified and taken 
on board before the process is launched. This is 
crucial if the vision articulated in this Chapter 
is to be attained. This would also neutralise a 
persistent factor in African land economies, 
namely the over-bearing role of the state in 
the determination of conditions of access to, 

control and administration of land resources, 
irrespective of the tenure categories under 
which land is held or owned; a factor which has 
led to the reality that in a large number of cases 
land policies read mainly like ad hoc statements 
of how the state seeks to perform that role. 

4.5.2	Recognizing	the	role	of	indigenous	
institutions

A major and continual challenge which land 
policy development on the continent faces 
is the need to recognize the legitimacy of 
and improve on the role and operation of 
indigenous structures, institutions and land 
rights regimes and to provide a necessary 
interface between them and state-led systems 
of land management and administrations. In 
doing so it is imperative that the issue of equal 
access to and representation on all structures 
that are responsible for land management 
and administration are addressed. This is 
particularly critical since many indigenous land 
management structures do not allow any or 
sufficient women’s representations. This is 
all the more necessary in the context of land 
policies which seek the documentation of land 
rights, the empowerment of decentralized 
institutions in the administration of land at 
the local level and the provision of statutory 
frameworks for the evolution of informal land 
rights systems.

4.5.3	Consultation	with	the	land	using	
public

Adequate preparation must be made for 
informed consultation with the land using 
public on the major issues to be addressed in 
the policy. This can be done in a variety of ways 
including the publication and circulation of 
discussion papers or representation of various 
categories of land users before Commissions of 



