










































27

Enquiry or policy steering committees backed 
by strong inter-disciplinary expert support. In 
doing this, care must be taken to ensure that all 
categories of the land using public, especially 
women, are reached. In this way, dominance of 
established land sector institutions and other 
interest groups whose roles and mandates may 
need to change in the course of land reforms, 
will be neutralized.

4.5.4	Engagement	with	civil	society	
organizations

Land policy development should recognize and 
adequately provide for a deep engagement 
with Civil Society Organizations (CSOs). These 
organizations can provide necessary checks 
and balances on government decision-making 
during the development and implementation 
of land policies. Effective opportunities for 
feedback and iterative processes with CSOs and 
other special interest groups should therefore 
be built into the consultative process. The 
deeper the engagement with such groups, 
the more enriched and the higher the degree 
of public acceptance and ownership will the 
policy be. Where parliamentary review and 
approval is required to validate or legitimize the 
outcomes of the policy development process, it 
would be ideal if these and other groups are 
given opportunity to offer additional input at 
that stage, if only to ensure that their initial 
contributions have not been glossed over in 
the final drafts of the policy document.

4.5.5 Launching the land policy 
development process

The actual sequencing of activities and events in 
the trajectory of land policy development has, 
however, varied across countries. While some 
countries have initiated the process by first 
identifying key land related issues and problems 

through public consultations of various degrees 
of intensity, others have proceeded through 
state commissioned researches or position 
papers. Yet others have, through constitutional 
provisions as well as primary and subsidiary 
legislation, simply dealt with land related 
issues and problems without any specific and 
coherent articulation. In this latter respect, land 
policy development has followed rather than 
preceded the promulgation of land legislation. 
It is important to remember, however, that 
whatever route is taken, detailed policy 
development and legislative and institutional 
reform should take place through a phased and 
iterative process rather than on a sequential 
linear model. The major stages in the road map 
for reform should, nonetheless, be set out with 
clear milestones to which the key stakeholders 
subscribe. That roadmap should avoid detailed 
prescriptions and timetables for institutional 
reform unless it is quite clear that these are 
feasible and that associated costs have been 
budgeted for.
 
Taking time to consult effectively and following 
a flexible calendar are essential to confidence 
building between government and the people. 
Political leadership and development of key 
messages for delivery to the public matter in 
providing assurance about the process to be 
followed, which will likely take several years. 
The importance of land rights across and 
within African countries underscores the need 
to support development of civil society actors 
and networks with knowledge of land issues on 
both national, Pan-African and global levels.

4.5.6 Building capacity for land policy 
development

An important objective of land policy 
development and reform should be to 
comprehensively restructure institutions 



