










































28

for land administration so as to achieve 
decentralized, transparent, efficient and cost-
effective delivery of land services, in a manner 
which meets customer requirements and 
that is financially self-sustaining.  Institutional 
restructuring does not always mean creating 
an entirely new institutional arrangement from 
scratch.  Sometimes design and implementation 
could be around existing national, regional 
and local structures following a credible re-
engineering process.  Public or state sector land 
institutions could be re-engineered to address 
problems such as scattered and restricted 
access to records, poor internal communication 
systems, obsolete operating procedures, 
overlapping, conflicting and unclear mandates, 
duplication of efforts and responsibilities, and 
waste of resources.

4.5.7	Ensuring	availability	of	financial	and	
human resources

More often than not, the development of land 
policies in Africa does not take into account 
full financial and economic cost appraisals 
hence provide only for inadequate resource 
commitment and mobilization for reform 
implementation.  In addition, land policies have 
been designed, promulgated and even launched 
without any genuine concern for the human 
resources and other logistical requirements 
necessary to carry out the wide-ranging reforms 
that are proposed.  In some cases existing laws 
and implementation mechanisms have been 
swept away by new policies even though no 
new arrangements had been put in place to 
manage the transition.  Similarly transitional 
arrangements and preparations such as staff 
capacity building and training, public information 
and communication, have not always been 
taken into account in the policy development 
process. These are important issues which land 
policy development must address.

4.5.8	Communication	for	land	policy	
development

Effective and robust communication through 
a variety of channels including newspapers, 
television messages, radio broadcasts and 
newsletters is critical in the development of 
land policies.  Effective communication should 
be integral and cross-cutting hence requires 
the development of a coherent strategy that 
takes account of the entire policy development 
process.  Communication is particularly crucial 
when soliciting and collating stakeholder 
inputs and feedback as well as driving public 
education and awareness campaigns before 
and during implementation.  Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) are today 
considered the driving force of the global 
information society and knowledge-based 
economies hence should play a significant 
role in land policy development.  ICTs can 
benefit land policy development in two main 
ways.  First, ICTs can improve the efficiency 
and effectiveness of service delivery through 
computerized systems.  Secondly, ICTs can help 
with information delivery and dissemination 
of policy components and associated legal 
instruments. Appropriately used, this can 
reduce the digital divide, improve the 
awareness of rural communities of their rights 
and enhance their participation in policy 
development.

4.5.9 Providing anchorage for further 
policy development in land-related 
sectors and sub-sectors

The status of land resources is an important 
determinant of the health and vitality of 
sectors and sub-sectors which depend on 
them for productivity.  Among these are 
agriculture, livestock, energy, minerals, water, 
wildlife, forestry and human settlements.  



