










































32

has run its course. Thus no opportunity is 
accorded to the public or specific stakeholders 
to evaluate the capacity or technical proficiency 
of those modalities in the light of challenges 
arising from the additional and often complex 
tasks contemplated by new land policies. 

5.2.2 Lack of capacity to manage change

The second typical impediment to land policy 
implementation is that in many countries the 
task of implementation is assigned to existing 
institutions or agencies responsible for the 
administration of the land sector.  The problem 
is that the orientation of these agencies often 
stands as a major obstacle to change and 
innovation. There are three major reasons for 
this. First most land administration institutions 
or agencies draw their mandates from a 
colonial heritage characterized by operational 
conservatism. That heritage is not only inflexible 
and driven by path dependent objectives; it 
is also fundamentally averse to change and 
adaptation. Second, most of these institutions 
or agencies are not just slow or inefficient; 
they also lack the technological know-how 
required to manage contemporary land reform 
programmes. Third the bureaucratic structures 
developed around these institutions or agencies 
are not only complex and inaccessible, but may 
also be deeply implicated in patronage and 
corruption. Many observers have therefore 
concluded that existing land administration 
institutions or agencies in Africa are virtually 
incapable of managing systems and processes 
which require transparency and accountability.

5.2.3 Defects in policy development

The third impediment is that the process of 
policy development itself has proved to be 
defective in several countries.  Desktop research 
leading to quick fixes has, in several countries, 
produced policy prescriptions that do not 

answer to the needs of those individuals and 
communities who depend on land resources 
for their livelihoods. The idea of stakeholder 
and civil society participation is still regarded 
by many governments as an usurpation of their 
residual responsibility to direct and implement 
public policy. In many countries formerly under 
British colonial rule, the process of policy 
development still proceeds primarily by way of 
cabinet briefs and white or green papers rather 
than through public enquiry and consultation. 
Attempts to implement policies devised in this 
manner have often been resisted or ignored by 
their intended targets. 

5.2.4 Lack of baseline data

The fourth impediment is that a number of 
policies have been prepared in the absence of 
adequate baseline data on the conditions of land 
as an integrated political, economic and social 
system. In addition, in many African countries 
land data are still manually operated and 
inaccurately recorded. Efforts to put together 
efficient land information systems have been 
hampered by lack of adequate resources and 
modern technology. Land policies prepared in 
this manner have led to prescriptions that do 
not adequately reflect the realities obtaining in 
the land sector.

5.2.5	Inadequacy	of	implementation	
infrastructure

The fifth impediment to land policy 
implementation is the evident lack of 
implementation infrastructure in terms of 
capacity, financial resources and institutional 
arrangements. Donor assistance in correcting 
this deficiency has not always been reliable and 
sustainable.  In such circumstances, policies, 
however comprehensive or innovative simply 
cannot be implemented. 



