










































33

5.3 Necessary Steps for Effective 
Land Policy Implementation

5.3.1 The scope of a land policy 
implementation	framework	

Land policy implementation entails the 
systematic identification and execution of 
all steps necessary for the attainment of the 
goals and prescription set out in the national 
land policy. It is the translation of policy into a 
programme of land reform designed to deliver 
a wide range of services and benefits to the 
land using public and to sectors which depend 
on the land system for value addition. Broadly 
speaking, that range includes, but is not  limited 
to, the redistribution of land resources, the 
delivery of secure land rights, the improvement 
of sustainable methods of land use, the 
reorganization of land administration structures 
and services and the facilitation of the support  
services infrastructure required for optimum 
development of the land and related sector 
functions. The greater the number of elements 
in that range the more comprehensive will be 
the policy development process as well as the 
implementation steps which seek to deliver 
them. Efficient, cost-effective and sustainable 
delivery of that range of services and benefits 
require that a number of additional steps be 
taken beyond the conclusion and presentation 
of national land policy.

5.3.2 Design of land policy 
implementation	strategies

The first step in effective land policy 
implementation is the design of realistic 
and achievable implementation strategies.  
Important elements in that design are the 
preparation of a comprehensive checklist of 

activities to be included in an implementation 
plan and programme, assessment of the 
capability of the various agencies whose 
participation is needed and the mapping out 
of the terrain both physical and cultural which 
is likely to be affected by the implementation 
process.  The crucial thing to appreciate here is 
that the implementation process is more than 
just technical, it is a deeply social and political 
exercise. 

5.3.3	Preparation	of	an	action	plan

The second step is the preparation of an action 
plan. This must involve realistic programming 
and sequencing, proper costing, accurate 
assessment of financial and technological 
needs, along with capacity building and 
mobilization of resources required for the short, 
medium and long term implementation of key 
components of the policy. Because programmes 
contemplated in land policies cannot be 
implemented en bloc, good practice demands 
that the implementation of certain aspects 
be preceded by piloting in order to test novel 
approaches and methodologies. Such piloting 
enables policy-makers to take lessons learnt 
on board before scaling up implementation 
programmes on a regional or national scale. 

Further, even the best designed land policy 
implementation processes will barely get 
off the ground unless sufficient financial, 
technical, logistical and human resources 
have been secured.  Caution must be taken 
to avoid donor-driven processes since these 
sometimes attract only short to medium term 
funding.    Enduring land policy reforms must 
therefore be cost effective and financially self-
sustaining.  Consequently African governments 
would do well to develop land service delivery 
systems that are affordable for the majority of 
the population.



