










































34

5.3.4	Mobilization	of	political	
commitment

The third step is to ensure a high level of 
political commitment by the governing elites. 
The importance of political commitment cannot 
be over-emphasized. Many policy components 
are bound to be unpopular with and therefore 
resisted by some segments of the population. 
This will be the case with any components 
calling for widespread re-distribution of land or 
the conversion of absolute land rights to systems 
which restore radical title to the state as was 
the case with the agrarian programmes carried 
out in Egypt in the 1950s and more recently in 
Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, and the former Portuguese 
colonies. Such resistance can easily frustrate 
the successful delivery of services intended for 
vulnerable groups in society. Further, reform 
packages contained in land policies often prove 
to be onerous and therefore require diversion 
of resources from other social and economic 
programmes.  

The nature and extent of political commitment 
will understandably vary from one country to 
another. In certain situations such commitment 
may take the form of reattribution of the 
land reform portfolio to the most powerful 
offices in the land such as the Presidency. 
More often though, this commitment entails 
the establishment of dedicated land reform 
ministries or autonomous institutions 
whose exclusive function is the execution of 
programmes outlined in the policy. Only then 
will the goals of the national land policy remain 
part of the development agenda of the state.

5.3.5	Continuous	public	engagement	
through decentralised structures

The fourth step in effective land policy 
implantation is to maintain continuous public 

ownership and acceptance of the main 
elements of the policy.  Without effective 
engagement of primary stakeholders at 
all stages in the implementation process 
leadership per se will not guarantee the delivery 
of outcomes contemplated in the policy. It 
is important that stakeholder engagement 
continues beyond completion of the policy 
development stage. Experience has shown 
that the implementation of land policies will 
move much faster where such engagement is 
organized in terms of decentralized structures 
that are fully controlled by those targeted in 
land policies. The participation of women, who 
remain the primary users of land in rural Africa, 
remains critical in this regard. Consequently, 
implementation processes should strike 
a balance between the roles of relevant 
central, regional and local entities, institutions 
and groups in order to ensure that public 
engagement in land services delivery remains 
effective.  

Placing decision-making powers at the local 
level is arguably the most efficient way to 
secure land rights of individual households 
and communities, even though some form 
of nationwide monitoring and review may 
be required.  In this regard, land policy 
implementation processes should aim to 
ensure that public sector land institutions work 
in collaboration with local structures in order 
to bring services closer to the people and that 
they build on local innovations by informal and 
indigenous authorities as is often the case in 
regard to local land parcel demarcations and 
documentation systems and dispute settlement 
procedures, many of which are time-tested and 
have served the people well in the absence of 
intervention by the state.



