










































35

5.3.6	Legislating	land	policy	components

The fifth step is to identify those components 
of the policy which must be legislated and the 
preparation of instruments and development of 
structures and procedures for the management 
of those components. In most cases the 
components requiring legislation and the design 
of new institutional structures will be contained 
in the policy document itself. It is reasonable to 
expect nonetheless that new laws will need to 
be enacted, existing ones revised or amended 
and institutions designed or re-designed 
before many aspects of a new policy can be 
operationalised. It is advisable to take these 
steps as part of the preparatory stages of the 
implementation programme. What is important 
however, is to avoid unnecessary proliferation 
of legislative and institutional structures as 
has happened in a number of countries in East 
and Southern Africa. Apart from the fact that 
such proliferation adds to complexity, more 
often than not, it increases the costs of the 
implementation processes. 

A number of countries may feel the need 
to proceed by way of enactment of interim 
measures as was done in post-apartheid South 
Africa or is in process in Southern Sudan or other 
countries emerging from protracted conflicts. 
Such measures must, however, give way to 
more permanent legislative and institutional 
arrangements if long term sustainability of land 
policy programmes is to be secured. An emerging 
practice is to ensure that such arrangements 
are fully anchored in the relevant country’s 
Constitution (whether interim or final). 

5.3.7	Domesticating	relevant	regional	and	
international	commitments

Where policy prescriptions touch on issues 
that require regional convergence or the 

domestication of international obligations, 
those dimensions should be factored into the 
processes of legislating and institutional design.  
Domestic enforcement of international and 
regional commitments will require that the 
management of resources otherwise controlled 
by one member state takes into account the 
needs of nationals of other member states. Land 
policy development and implementation is one 
critical area in which domestic legislation and 
institutions must provide avenues to facilitate 
the convergence of such interests and needs. 
Efforts to develop a common land resource 
agenda among SADCC member states is an 
important initiative in this direction.

5.3.8 Responding to new policy challenges

Finally, when considering the steps necessary 
for the effective implementation of land 
policies, African governments are advised to 
appreciate that however technically sound or 
meticulously implemented their various land 
policies are these cannot resolve all of Africa’s 
problems for all time.  Fresh pressures both 
internal and external will continue to impact on 
the land sector after current implementation 
programmes and processes are completed.  
Such pressures are likely to require radically 
new policy options, management regimes or 
technical solutions. It is important, therefore, 
that governments should put in place realistic 
time-frames for the review, revision or even 
replacement of current policies. Such reviews 
should be stakeholder driven, informed by the 
most up-to-date information on the performance 
of the land sector as well as by lessons learnt 
from similar experiences elsewhere. 



