










































38

developed useful tools which can be adapted 
to this purpose. A similar mechanism has also 
been established to track development in the 
Sahel region. Finally, UNECA and other partners 
are also developing benchmarks and indicators 
for tracking progress in land reform in Africa.

6.1.3 The need for adequate data

If it is to be effective any system for tacking 
progress in land policy development and 
implementation must be fed with appropriate 
and relevant information. In this regard it is 
very important to characterize the baseline 
which is the starting point of the tracking 
process. Consequently the issue of appropriate 
data collection/processing tools must be 
addressed as early as possible. A tracking 
system which is regularly fed with relevant data 
will deliver the pertinent information requited 
to steer the whole land policy development 
and implementation processes. 

6.1.4 Building partnership for tracking

Monitoring and assessing the effects of land 
policy on livelihoods, economic growth and 
sustainable use of natural resources require the 
active collaboration of different institutions, 
with each playing a specific role. At country 
level, depending on the institutional settings, 
other ministries (such as those in charge of 
physical planning, agriculture, forests, urban 
development and scientific research) can, 
apart from the Ministry in charge of land, 
make significant contributions towards the 
tracking process. In addition national statistics 
departments, as well as Universities, CSOs 
and Centres of Excellence could be involved 
in the collection and processing of land policy 
information.

At the regional and continental levels, there 
is need to devise and implement tools and 

mechanisms that would facilitate the sharing 
of experiences in land-related participatory 
monitoring and evaluation (PME) systems. 
Such tools and mechanisms should be built on 
evidence provided by observatories specializing 
on land policy issues. Networking is thus critical 
if these efforts are to be sustained.

Another useful tool is to collect and process 
geospatial data on land issues and transform 
them into thematic maps. The value of 
this particular tool is that it provides visual 
opportunity for updating land information as 
frequently as possible. 

6.2 Challenges Related to Tracking

6.2.1 The problem of methodology

The main challenge to the tracking of land 
policy development and implementation 
relates to methodology. Five elements of this 
are examined here.

6.2.2 Stakeholder agreement on what 
should be tracked

The first and starting point is the need for a 
clear and common understanding amongst all 
stakeholders, of the major elements of policy 
that should be tracked. Among these are: (i) 
effective use of resources, (ii) the extent of 
organized consultative and other participatory 
processes, (iii) effective institutional capacities, 
(iv) equality of access to decision-making by all 
stakeholders, particularly women, (v) the rate 
of delivery of outputs, (vi) the adequacy of 
outcomes and (vii) the achievement of desired 
impacts. 

6.2.3	Defining	the	parameters	that	should	
be tracked



