










































39

The second element is the need for a clear 
and precise definition of the parameters that 
should be tracked. This involves identifying 
at a very early stage, a number of crucial 
questions regarding policy development and 
implementation for which the government 
(and other involved stakeholders) need clear 
answers.  Comprehensive identification of such 
crucial questions should form the basis for 
information gathering and data collection.

6.2.4	Defining	participatory	and	
measurable indicators

The third element is the design of measurable 
indicators which can be used to gauge progress 
or lack thereof. For the development of these 
indicators to be participatory, their initial design 
as well as conclusions and findings drawn from 
their application should be disseminated and 
feedback obtained from all stakeholders. Such 
feedback should subsequently be used to 
improve the indicators. 

6.2.5 The need for external backstopping

When measuring the progress achieved, in 
policy development and implementation, it is 
important to anticipate any resistance which 
may be encountered from internal stakeholders. 
The fourth element therefore is the need to 
combine internal tracking mechanisms with 
independent or external systems. That can 
be done through engagement of regional or 
internationally established tracking systems.

6.2.6	Effective	capacity	building	
programmes

The fifth element is to build capacity for tracking. 
This is critical for the sustainability of tacking 
systems. This will require not only financial 
means but also technical assistance, at least in 
the earlier stages. The specific capacity building 

needs for PME should however, be clearly 
expressed. Given the fact that decentralization 
is being gradually implemented in Africa, 
it is important to extend capacity building 
programmes to local levels.

6.3 Development and Application 
of Tracking Principles

6.3.1 Tracking principles 

At least seven main principles should 
be considered in the development of 
effective tracking mechanism for land policy 
development and implementation. The first 
principle is to assess the extent to which 
the policy development or implementation 
process conforms to initial designs. The second 
principle is to match land policy objectives 
with the expectations of beneficiaries as well 
as with the main requirements for sustainable 
development. This principle should guide 
tracking right from the development stage of a 
given land policy to its implementation. 

The third principle is to assess the extent to 
which the objectives of the land policy are 
achieved (for example objectives related to 
tenure security, equitable access to land, and 
reduction of conflicts…). This principle measures 
the gap between the objectives and the result 
obtained, and also seeks to give coherent 
explanation to the observed differences 
especially in regard to implementation. 

The fourth principle is to measure the 
effectiveness of the use of resources. This 
assesses the extent to which the resources 
mobilized for the development and 
implementation of the land policy have been 
rationally used in order to achieve satisfactory 
results with minimal inputs. 



