










































40

The fifth principle is to assess the sustainability 
of the land policy. This aims at verifying whether 
benefits derived from the implementation of 
land policy are sustained and whether they can 
support further land reforms. 

The sixth principle is to measure direct and 
indirect (whether positive or negative) effects 
of the land policy on beneficiaries as well as on 
natural resources. 

And the seventh and final principle in the 
development of effective tacking systems is to 
determine the overall coherence or consistency 
of land policy. This involves three main 
elements, namely (i) internal consistency i.e. the 
compatibility of the key components of the land 
policy to each other (customary rights/statutory 
rights, conservation purposes/economic 
objectives);  (ii) cross-sector consistency i.e. 
compatibility with and conformity among the key 
sectors involved in land policy (forest, fisheries, 
agriculture, pastoral activities, mining, urban 
development); and inter-regional consistency, 
i.e. whether there is convergence between 
national land policies and synergy with regional 
developments and policies.

6.3.2	 Criteria	for	application	of	tracking	
principles 

Application of tracking principles should conform 
to at least five criteria. First, the tracking process 
should be fully participatory. A sound tracking 
mechanism should be based on clear issues, 
questions, benchmarks, targets and indicators, 
developed through a systematic and participatory 
process. All relevant stakeholders should be 
involved from the initial stage of the process. 
Every effort should be made to achieve this even 
if the government is responsible for leading the 
process. Second, an effective tracking mechanism 
must be run on the basis of transparency, and 

good governance. Besides it should be iterative, 
and systematic with adequate mechanisms for 
communication and feedbacks. Third, proper 
tracking indicators should be adaptable to time, 
space and geographical specificities. Fourth, 
realistic benchmarks, including datelines, must 
be defined after a consultative process. Fifth and 
finally, it is important to set relevant frequencies 
for different components of the tracking system. 
For example inputs and impacts indicators cannot 
be measured within the same timeframe. While 
input indicators can be measured annually, 
budgetary constraints permitting the periodicity 
of assessment of impacts would depend on 
available information from research and similar 
sources. In particular, assessment of changes 
arising from land policy implementation, such 
as its effects on livelihoods, economic activities 
and sustainable natural resource management, 
would require much more time. Indeed such 
assessments are often long-term processes 
which require additional investments. 

6.4 The Need for Feedback

Given its iterative dimension, a good system 
for tracking land policy development and 
implementation must have solid links with 
decision making processes at various levels. 
This must appear clearly in the PME conceptual 
model. Experiences from other initiatives indicate 
that short of regular and systematic feedback 
on the successes, failures and the institutional 
bottlenecks, no effective political remedy can be 
applied to re-adjust the whole land policy system. 
Feedbacks should systematically be documented 
and disseminated to all stakeholders. For large 
groups, seminars and workshops are adequate 
means of communication while reports with 
precise recommendations are preferable for 
decision makers. Inter-sectoral round tables 
could be also used to share feedback.



