










































vii

Acknowledgments

The Framework and Guidelines on Land Policy in Africa is the result of a three-year road 
map of activities that involved intense reflection, rigorous consultations and exemplary 
collaboration across the continent. These activities involved African continental and 
regional institutions, governments, prominent African land experts from all regions of 
the continent, and representatives of land stakeholders and development partners. The 
activities of the road map were implemented by a tripartite consortium of the African 
Union Commission (AUC), the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) 
and the African Development Bank (AfDB), through a Land Policy Initiative (LPI). The 
AUC provided overall leadership for the functioning of the Initiative, with ECA and AfDB 
providing technical support and mobilizing effective partnerships to ensure its success.

The preparation of this document was made possible by the excellent leadership of the 
heads of the three institutions constituting the consortium: Dr Jean Ping, Chairperson 
of AUC; Mr Abdoulie Janneh, United Nations Under-Secretary-General and Executive 
Secretary of ECA; and Dr Donald Kaberuka, President of the AfBD Group. Overall guidance 
and oversight to the initiative was provided by Ms. Rosebud Kuwidjila and Ms. Tumusiime 
Rhoda Peace, respectively former and current Commissioner for Economy and Agriculture 
of the African Union Commission.

Overall supervision and strategic guidance to produce the document in its current form and 
content was provided by the Steering Committee of the Land Policy Initiative comprising 
directors of the three continental organizations. These directors are Dr Ahmadu Babagana 
and Dr Abebe Haile-Gabriel respectively former and current directors of  the Department 
of Rural Economy and Agriculture of AUC; Dr Josue Dione, Director of the Food Security 
and Sustainable Development Division of ECA; Mr Chuku-Dinka Spencer, former Director 
of Agriculture for West and Central Africa of AfDB; and Mr Philibert Afrika and Mr Steve 
Kayizzi-Mugerwa respectively former and current directors of Operational Resources and 
Policies Department of AfDB.

Under the guidance of the Steering Committee, focal persons from the three institutions 
provided intellectual inputs and resource mobilization, and built effective partnerships 
which were critical to the success of the LPI activities. These focal persons were Dr Brave 
Ndisale and Dr Emmanuel Tambi, both former staff members of AUC and Mr Khecha 
Abderrahmane from AUC; Dr Joan Kagwanja, former staff member of ECA; Mr Frank 
Kufakwandi of AfDB, Ms Esther Kasalu Coffin, former staff of AfDB, and Ms Rachel Aron 
and Ms Mary Manneko Monyau from AfDB. Further support was provided by Mr. Maurice 
Tankou of ECA.



