



































































A network approach to assessing social capacity for landscape planning: The case of fire-prone forests in Oregon, USA


20 A.P. Fischer et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 147 (2016) 18–27

s Ecor

b
c
l

2

2

fi
o
b
n
(
o
p
b
t
m
–
l

Fig. 1. The Eastern Cascade

etween bonding and bridging capital such that cooperation on the
omplex problem of increasing wildfire risk is not only possible but
ikely.

. Methods

.1. Study area

The ECE (Fig. 1) is a 3.3 million hectare landscape that crosses
ve counties and includes several small cities and large expanses
f ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)  and mixed-conifer forest inha-
ited by species of federal and state policy interest such as the
orthern spotted owl (Strix occidentalis caurina) and mule deer
Odocoileus hemionus). Two-thirds of the land area is in public
wnership (mostly federal), one-sixth is held by tribes and cor-
orate forestry entities, and the remaining one-sixth is owned
y non-corporate private landowners (e.g., individuals, families,

rusts). Our social network analysis included all but the northern-

ost portion of the ecoregion – the eastern flanks of Mount Hood
 which is tied to the expansive networks of organizations in the

arge urban area of Portland, Oregon.
egion (ECE) of Oregon, USA.

Fire is a natural and ecologically important process in the ECE
and throughout the inland Northwest. However, the past century of
fire suppression, commercial logging, and livestock grazing, com-
bined with drought and incursions by invasive plants, insects and
diseases, has led to an accumulation of flammable forest vegeta-
tion (Hessburg, Agee, & Franklin, 2005; USDA Forest Service, 2009).
This vegetation now fuels “mega-fires” (Williams, 2013), which are
atypical in size and severity even for the fire-adapted ecosystems
where they occur. Alteration of the historical fire regime is also
changing the distinct assemblages of natural communities in the
ECE (Hessburg et al., 2005).

Organizations in the ECE have made substantial investments in
collaborating on forest and fire management issues (Davis et al.,
2012; Oregon & Solutions, 2013; Summers, 2014). For example,
The Nature Conservancy, with funding from the Forest Service,
administers two Fire Learning Networks, which engage land
management organizations in the restoration of fire-dependent

ecosystems through landscape-scale collaborative planning (Butler
& Goldstein, 2010). The Forest Service and the Bureau of Land
Management have formed formal partnerships around wild-
fire response. In addition, the Collaborative Forest Landscape



