



































































A network approach to assessing social capacity for landscape planning: The case of fire-prone forests in Oregon, USA


d Urb

R
O
s
m
l

2

t
t
s
(
t
a
a
&
r
fi
w
fi
m
a
a
w
w
t
b
t

n
o
a
w
i
t
fi
t
c
f
d
w
fi
g
a
s
a
m
F
d

n
r
i
p
o
o
n
s
f
C
t
p
o
F
F

A.P. Fischer et al. / Landscape an

estoration Program, which was established under Title IV of the
mnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 on Forest Land-

cape Restoration, has funded projects that engage local public land
anagers and stakeholder groups in planning for management of

andscapes on national forests.

.2. Data collection

We  conducted semi-structured interviews with representa-
ives of organizations concerned with increasing wildfire risk in
he fire-prone forests in the ECE to collect network data for this
tudy. Network data are defined by (1) information about ties
i.e., relationships, interactions) among actors (i.e., organizations)
hrough which information and resources are shared, and (2) actor
ttributes (e.g., type of organization). We  used a snowball sampling
pproach to identify the individuals we would interview (Doreian

 Woodard, 1992), beginning with 45 individuals members the
esearch team considered key actors in the area of forest and wild-
re management in the study area. We  asked interview informants
ith whom in other organizations they had interacted in the past
ve years to: (1) plan, fund, or implement work; (2) obtain infor-
ation or expertise; (3) give advice; (4) gain exposure to new ideas,

nd (5) influence planning and management regarding wildfire risk
nd fire-prone forest management. We  conducted second and third
aves of snowball sampling by contacting additional individuals
ho were mentioned in response to these questions by at least

hree interviewees in the preceding wave. The third wave of snow-
all sampling did not identify any additional interview informants,
herefore reaching saturation.

In total, we interviewed 154 individuals representing 87 orga-
izations. In the interviews we first asked informants about their
rganizations’ institutional concerns about wildfire risk, beliefs
bout the role fire should play in the forest landscape, and how
ildfire and fire-prone forests should be managed. Then we  asked

nformants to name individuals in other organizations with whom
hey have had the five types of interactions listed above in the past
ve years to address wildfire risk in the ECE. To ensure confiden-
iality and create the desired unit of analysis (the organization), we
ombined responses from individuals within the same organization
or each of these questions. This process yielded a multi-relational
ata set of ties among organizations concerned with increasing
ildfire risk in the ECE. In total, 476 organizations were identi-
ed through the interviews. In most cases, we  considered local
overnment agencies, private businesses, and non-profit groups
s organizations. For complex organizations, such as universities,
tate and federal agencies, and non-profit groups operating at state
nd national levels, we treated local and regional offices and depart-
ents as unique organizations. For example, we  considered US

orest Service (USFS) national forest supervisor offices and ranger
istrict offices as separate organizations.

We drew on qualitative interview data to classify the 87 orga-
izations represented by interview informants as either forest
estoration or fire protection organizations on the basis of their
nstitutional beliefs about wildfire risk and how wildfire and fire-
rone forests should be managed. We  used secondary data (i.e.,
rganizations’ web pages and policy documents) to classify the
rganizations identified by less than three informants and therefore
ot interviewed. Forest restoration organizations included con-
ervation groups, sustainability groups, US Forest Service national
orests and ranger districts, watershed councils, Natural Resource
onservation Service districts and other organizations fundamen-
ally motivated to conserve or return ecological conditions and

rocesses to their historic range of variability. Fire protection
rganizations included rural and suburban fire departments, US
orest Service fire and aviation units, Oregon Department of
orestry units, timber companies, forestry and rangeland interest
an Planning 147 (2016) 18–27 21

groups and other organizations fundamentally motivated to pro-
tect homes, property and other assets from loss to wildfire. We also
classified organizations by their primary geographic focus: central
Oregon (CO), the northern portion of the ecoregion, which includes
Deschutes, Jefferson and Wasco Counties; south central Oregon
(SCO), the southern portion of the ecoregion, which includes Kla-
math and Lake Counties; and the area that includes both central
and south central Oregon (COSCO), i.e., the entire ecoregion. We
were unable to classify some organizations for which we did not
interview representatives by their primary goals and geographic
focus. We  treated these organizations as missing data and did not
include them in the analysis.

2.3. Data analysis

We used social network analysis (Wasserman & Faust, 1994)
to quantify the composition and distribution of ties among orga-
nizations. We  limited our analysis to the sets of organizations
that reported interacting for the purpose of (1) planning, fund-
ing, or implementing work (hereafter referred to as the “works
with” network) and (2) obtaining information or expertise (here-
after referred to as the “info from” network), since cooperation
and resource-seeking are two  primary types of interactions among
organizations. For each of these two networks we divided the orga-
nizations into separate groups, or subnetworks, according to their
goals and geographic focus. We  compared the size (number of
organizations) and average indegree (average number of times an
organization was  named) of the subnetworks to each other and to
the full network. We  used average indegree as an indicator of bond-
ing social capital (Borgatti et al., 1998); a denser, more interactive
community has greater potential for communication and coordi-
nation and thus, the production of bonding social capital (Borgatti
et al., 1998). We  used indegree instead of outdegree (i.e., average
number of times the organizations named other organizations) to
control for potential bias caused by interviewees who were able to
recall large numbers of contacts.

To examine how differences in organizations’ goals and geo-
graphic focus structured the ties among them, we compared the
number of ties within and between the subnetworks to the aver-
age number of expected ties derived from 1000 simulations of the
network structure controlling for the number of times an orga-
nization named (outdegree) and was named (indegree) by other
organizations. This method is referred to as blockmodeling in the
social network analysis literature (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). We
used ties among organizations of the same type (within-group)
to indicate bonding social, and ties between actors of different
types (between-group) to indicate bridging social capital. We  cal-
culated all social network measures and produced their graphic
representations with UCINET (Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 2002),
and conducted permutation tests with the SNA package of R (Butts,
2008; R.Development Core & Team, 2013).

3. Results

We identified 1270 ties among the 396 organizations in the
“works with” network and 335 ties among 158 organizations in the
“info from” network. Fig. 2a and b provides graphic depictions of the
reported relationships among the organizations in these networks.

Forest restoration organizations were identified more often on
average as working partners and sources of information by other
forest restoration organizations (i.e., had a higher average inde-

gree) than fire protection organizations were named by other fire
protection organizations (Table 1). CO and SCO organizations were
named as working partners and information sources by a simi-
lar number of other organizations in their respective subnetworks



