



































































A network approach to assessing social capacity for landscape planning: The case of fire-prone forests in Oregon, USA


A.P. Fischer et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 147 (2016) 18–27 23

Table  1
Descriptive network statistics.

Variables Number of organizations Number of reported ties Average indegree

Networks Works with Info from Works with Info from Works with Info from

Total 396 158 1270 355 3.2 2.1
Forest restoration 133 68 417 126 3.1 1.9
Fire  protection 225 76 374 105 1.7 1.4

o
p
n
f
t
o
o
s
i
w
i
c
w
a

g
n
o
t
n
o
o
r
t
a

o
o
i
s
fi
t
s
f
o
o
f
o
b
m
n
F
C
o
t
r
a

w
d
t
a
e
w
f

Central Oregon (CO) 127 44 
South central Oregon (SCO) 90 45 
Central and south central Oregon (COSCO) 108 48 

n average, while COSCO organizations were named as working
artners and information sources less often by other COSCO orga-
izations (Table 1). These findings indicate that the subnetwork of

orest restoration organizations was more densely interconnected
han the subnetwork of fire organizations, as were the subnetworks
f CO and SCO organizations in comparison to the subnetwork
f COSCO organizations. In other words, there was  more bonding
ocial capital structure to foster communication and coordination
n the forest restoration network than in the fire protection net-

ork, there were similar levels of bonding social capital structure
n the CO and SCO networks, and there was more bonding social
apital structure in these subregional networks than in the subnet-
ork of COSCO organizations that focused on the larger geographic

rea.
While bonding social capital is important for cooperation within

roups of similar actors, bridging social capital creates opportu-
ity for communication, coordination and joint-implementation
f plans across geographic and social boundaries. Results from
he blockmodel permutation tests indicate that in all cases orga-
izations reported working with and seeking information from
rganizations with the same goals and geographic focus more
ften than expected by chance (Table 2). In contrast, organizations
eported working with and seeking information from organiza-
ions with different goals and geographic foci less often or with

 frequency no different than expected based on chance (Table 2).
We found several exceptions that could provide evidence of

pportunities for ecoregion-scale planning. CO forest restoration
rganizations reported that they both worked with and received
nformation from SCO forest restoration organizations at a rate not
ignificantly different from what would be expected by chance. This
nding simply indicates that the proportion of cross-geography
ies between forest restoration and fire protection organizations is
imilar to that expected by chance given the distribution of the dif-
erent types of organizations in the total network and the in- and
utdegree of each organization. More notable, CO fire protection
rganizations named COSCO fire protection organizations, and CO
orest restoration organizations named COSCO forest restoration
rganizations, as sources of information more often than expected
y chance (Table 2). Most of the COSCO organizations were depart-
ents or divisions within institutions that hold a statewide or

ational focus (e.g., the state office of the Oregon Department of
orestry, Oregon State University’s College of Forestry, The Nature
onservancy’s Pacific Northwest Regional Office). The positioning
f some of these organizations as brokers is evident in their loca-
ion between the clusters of CO and SCO organizations and forest
estoration and fire protection organizations in the “works with”
nd “info from” network diagrams (Fig. 2a and b).

We  found only one instance in which organizations reported
orking with or seeking information from organizations that held
ifferent goals more often than expected by chance: SCO fire pro-
ection organizations named SCO forest restoration organizations

s working partners and information sources more often than
xpected (Table 2). We  found no examples in which organizations
ith different goals and different geographic foci interacted more

requently than expected by chance.
429 100 3.4 2.3
287 67 3.2 1.5

74 23 0.7 0.5

On the whole, the blockmodel permutation tests provide statis-
tical indication that organizations concerned with wildfire risk in
the forested landscape of the ECE do not comprise one cohesive net-
work. At smaller sub-regional landscape scales, however, (i.e., CO
and SCO) organizations displayed stronger network ties (Table 2).
Overall, organizations demonstrated preferences for interacting
with organizations that share similar goals and geographies.

4. Discussion

Organizations that share concern about a common landscape-
scale natural resource problem in a common area arguably could
benefit from cooperating on landscape planning. In the ECE,
however, we found that in most cases, as we hypothesized, organi-
zations with the same goals and geographic focus interacted more
frequently among themselves than with others to get work done
and to obtain information and expertise on the problem of wild-
fire risk. These findings indicate that bonding social capital was not
as strong across the network as a whole as it was within subnet-
works of similar organizations, especially subnetworks of similar
organization types, particularly forest restoration organizations. In
other words, we  did not find evidence that shared concern about
landscape-scale problems could counter homophily as an influence
on the structure of a large organizational network.

Our finding of homophily among forest restoration and fire
protection organizations is not surprising. Only since 2000 has
US federal wildfire policy-historically focused on fire suppression-
broadened to include goals for restoration of forest structure and
species composition (Dombeck, Williams, & Wood, 2004; Steelman
& Burke, 2007). The less-than-frequent interaction between for-
est restoration and fire protection organizations reflects the social
distance between organizations with these different goals. Despite
recent US policy initiatives and a growing advocacy movement to
integrate protection and restoration goals and strategies (Butler &
Goldstein, 2010; DellaSala et al., 2003; Wildland Fire Leadership
Council, 2011), it appears that the institutional cultures of fire
protection and forest restoration remain distinct, even in the ECE
where great progress has been made in collaboration on forest and,
separately, fire management (Davis et al., 2012; Oregon & Solutions,
2013; Summers, 2014). Some organizations appeared to be bridging
this cultural divide. For example, in SCO, fire protection organiza-
tions named forest restoration organizations as working partners
and information sources more often than expected by chance. Most
often this took the form of state and local fire departments and
fire-fighting agencies working with and seeking information and
advice from federal or state natural resource management agen-
cies, perhaps demonstrating attempts to communicate about and
coordinate or jointly-implement wildfire mitigation and response
efforts. In CO, forest restoration and fire protection organizations
interacted as frequently as expected by chance, providing no indica-
tion that these two types of organizations were reluctant to interact

with each other.

Our finding of geographic homophily is also not surprising.
Ecoregions, due to their size, contain multiple overlapping and
competing geographic, ecological and social territories. People, on

acer
Highlight



