



































































A network approach to assessing social capacity for landscape planning: The case of fire-prone forests in Oregon, USA


24 A.P. Fischer et al. / Landscape and Urban Planning 147 (2016) 18–27

Table 2
Observed vs. expected ties among and between organizations by goal and geographic emphasis.

*
L patter

t
t
a
I
w
o
e
w
c
n
o
s
t
i
w
i
t

w
n
s
b
n
1
t
d
s
p
i
l

r
g
l
I
t
h

p ≤ 0.05, **p  ≤ 0.01, NSD: no significant difference.
ight shading indicates hypothesized patterns; dark shading indicates unexpected 

he other hand, develop connections to place at local scales, to
he spatial entities to which a group feels a sense of belonging
nd by which a group governs itself (Fall, 2003; Powell, 2010).
n some cases these social boundaries may  even seem arbitrary

hen considered in their ecological context (Fall, 2003). In the ECE,
ur findings suggest that the spatial territories that share similar
cological conditions and face similar threats (i.e., wildfire risk)
ere not strongly connected via social processes (i.e., communi-

ation, coordination, and joint-implementation of plans). Again, a
otable exception was that COSCO organizations were named by CO
rganizations more often than expected by chance in some cases,
uggesting that they may  be in a position to link local organizations
o discussions about wildfire planning at larger scales. Interest-
ngly, however, COSCO organizations named SCO organizations as

orking partners and information sources less often than expected,
ndicating a lack of attention to SCO by COSCO organizations despite
heir broad spatial focus.

When interpreted using social capital and organizational theory,
e found little evidence of structural conditions offering opportu-
ity for cooperation on the shared problem of wildfire risk at the
cale of the ECE. Social interaction can provide a mechanism for
uilding shared cognition, group identity and perceived legitimacy
ecessary for collective action around a common problem (Ostrom,
990; Yaffee, 1998). Bridging interactions, when frequent and sus-
ained, can build bonding social capital among organizations with
isparate goals and geographies. Our study did not reveal a cohe-
ive, densely interconnected network of forest restoration and fire
rotection organizations that would reflect frequent and sustained

nteraction. Rather, we found a network largely bifurcated on ideo-
ogical and geographic boundaries.

Although it makes sense that organizations would invest in
elationships with organizations that share similar goals and geo-
raphic foci, this social structure is problematic for managing large

andscapes to achieve broad, shared goals at the ecoregional scale.
n fire-prone landscapes such as the ECE, some forest restora-
ion activities (e.g., thinning to restore desired structure) can
elp reduce the risk of large wildfire, and some fire protection
ns.

activities (e.g., thinning to reduce flammable vegetation) can help
return forest structure and processes to their natural fire regimes.
Despite the complementarity of forest restoration and fire protec-
tion, these two  types of organizations did not appear to engage in a
pattern of interaction that reflects frequent communication, coor-
dination or joint problem-solving. The lack of apparent high-levels
of cooperation among these organizations could hinder recog-
nition of interdependencies between fire protection and forest
restoration. It could also limit opportunities to develop mutu-
ally acceptable strategies for addressing the problem of large and
intense wildfires burning across the jurisdictions of the multiple
ownerships and stakeholder groups that comprise the ecoregion.

Moreover, despite wildfire’s tendency to burn across admin-
istrative and ownership boundaries, fire protection organizations
did not appear to be very interconnected at the scale of the ECE:
they were named as working partners and information sources
by less than two  other fire protection organizations on average,
whereas forest restoration organizations were named by more than
three other forest restoration organizations on average (Table 1).
Although we did not ask who  they worked with and sought
information from during fire events (which might have reflected
stronger ties) the low average indegree of fire protection orga-
nizations may  be a reflection of legal and policy barriers that
prevent planning and implementing joint wildfire risk mitigation
actions across their different jurisdictions (Fischer & Charnley,
2012; Knight & Landres, 1998; Landres et al., 1998).

Our finding of relatively little bridging social capital at local
levels may  reflect the logic of cooperation on natural resource man-
agement at smaller spatial scales than the ecoregion. Although the
accumulation of flammable forest vegetation is an ecoregion-wide
problem, wildfire events rarely if ever occur on the scale of an entire
ecoregion. Thus, while collective ecoregion-wide problem solving
and coordination of plans and actions would likely be fruitful, coop-

eration to conduct the work of thinning and prescribed burning to
minimize potential movement of fire across the landscape makes
more sense on smaller scales. The mismatch between the spatial
scales on which landscapes and humans function, as suggested by

acer
Highlight

acer
Highlight



