



































































A network approach to assessing social capacity for landscape planning: The case of fire-prone forests in Oregon, USA


d Urb

o
t
r
b
o

d
2
f
f
i
a
1
t
R
t
e
m
p
e
a
(
p
t
c

a
p
g
t
m
n
&
Z
l
i
z
t
m
i
g
t
s
o
t
A
i
s
t

5

o
d
i
l
a
i
w
a
c
t
m

A.P. Fischer et al. / Landscape an

ur findings, arguably has led to a disconnect between the spa-
ial scale of an ecological problem and the spatial scale of human
esponse (Kondolf & Podolak, 2014). Despite increasing wildfire risk
eing an ecoregion-scale problem, we see little evidence of social
rganization for addressing the problem at this scale.

While it generally takes situations of stress or scarcity to compel
ifferent interests to forge alliances (Benjamin et al., 2011; Wolf,
011), network governance institutions can create opportunities
or building shared cognition, group membership, and legitimacy
or landscape management (Powell, 2010). A variety of initiatives
n recent years have promoted cooperation on landscape man-
gement in the U.S. (Butler & Goldstein, 2010; Knight & Landres,
998; Laven, Jewiss, & Mitchell, 2012), including the aforemen-
ioned Fire Learning Network and Collaborative Forest Landscape
estoration Program. The networks formed through these initia-
ives plan natural resource management at scales much finer than
coregions, however. The National Cohesive Wildland Fire Manage-
ent Strategy, on the other hand, still in its early stages, aims to

romote collaborative processes at multiple scales, involving gov-
rnment and non-governmental organizations and the public in
n “all lands” approach to forest restoration and fire protection
Wildland Fire Leadership Council, 2011). These initiatives could
lay a bigger role in building connectivity among stakeholders in
he management of large fire-prone landscapes and encouraging
ooperation across geographic and ideological boundaries.

The question remains, however: What is the appropriate bal-
nce between bonding and bridging structure for landscape-scale
lanning, and at what scale? Excessive bonding social capital can
ive rise to homogeneity, jeopardizing a network’s ability to main-
ain a diverse knowledge base, and too much bridging social capital

ay  make it difficult to build the trust and norms of reciprocity
eeded to efficiently communicate and act on new ideas (Borgatti

 Cross, 2003; Burt, 2004; Reagans & McEvily, 2003; Reagans &
uckerman, 2001; Ruef, 2002). To effectively address the prob-
em of increasing wildfire risk policies must encourage sufficient
nteraction between forest restoration and fire protection organi-
ations to foster complex problem-solving without compromising
he social cohesion within these subnetworks that allows for com-

unication and coordination. Moreover, policies should encourage
nteraction between organizations in different geographic subre-
ions to the extent that it is practical and does not divert resources
hat could otherwise be invested in management at smaller land-
cape scales. At the spatial scale of ecoregions, which are composed
f multiple, more coherent social territories, weak bridging struc-
ure may  be sufficient for planning and joint problem-solving.
ssuming the number of relationships organizations can enter into

s limited, it may  be more important for parties to invest in relation-
hips at scales at which work (e.g., implementing fuels reduction
reatments) can be coordinated.

. Conclusions

Management of ecological conditions and processes in multi-
wnership landscapes requires cooperative planning among
iverse stakeholder groups. This is especially true in arid human-

nhabited forested landscapes of the world, where increasingly
arge and intense wildfires burn irrespective of property bound-
ries and land designations. In these areas, organizations involved
n the restoration of forests and the protection of property from

ildfire could benefit from working together to share information

nd coordinate strategies. The structure of organizational networks
an indicate potential opportunities for communication, coordina-
ion and joint implementation of landscape-scale natural resource

anagement plans.
an Planning 147 (2016) 18–27 25

We investigated patterns of interaction among organizations
concerned with increasing wildfire risk in Oregon’s ECE for
evidence of structural conditions that create opportunity for
cooperation. Social network analysis enabled us to quantitatively
characterize the bonding and bridging social capital among these
organizations. We  found that despite sharing concern about wild-
fire risk in an area with a common set of ecological conditions,
organizations with forest restoration and fire protection goals com-
prised distinct homophilous networks, as did organizations that
focused on different geographic areas of the ecoregion. At the sub-
regional scale, however, we  found that social network ties were
stronger, suggesting that social structure may  be in place locally for
cooperative planning. When interpreted through the lens of social
capital and network theory these findings raise questions about the
extent to which the overall structure of the organizational network
reflects capacity to address wildfire risk in fire-prone forests on the
ecoregion scale.

For natural resource planning to occur on large spatial scales
and across boundaries, the social organization for cooperation
must be built. Our research results validate and suggest continued
need for network governance institutions to provide connectivity
across geographic and social boundaries. An important step for
research on stakeholder networks and landscape planning is to
better understand the implications of different network structures
for accomplishing different types of objectives relating to natural
resource planning. The appropriate scale at which to foster bridging
and bonding social capital among organizations will vary depend-
ing on the goals and objectives for landscape management. We
suggest that combining network analysis with qualitative data from
stakeholder interviews may  be a useful way to explore the relation-
ship between network structure and social capacity for landscape
planning and consider how to strengthen social networks at the
ecoregion-scale.

Our study contributes to scholarly literature by investigating
whether shared concern about a pressing landscape-scale prob-
lem such as wildfire could counter homophily as an influence on
the structure of a large organizational network. We  confirm that
homophily is a powerful influence on social organization even
in cases of shared concern about pressing natural resource prob-
lems. Our research also provides an empirical example of how
network analysis can illuminate opportunities and constraints for
cooperative natural resource planning among organizations oper-
ating in the same landscape or ecoregion. It provides a method for
assessing capacity for landscape planning through quantification of
the bonding and bridging social capital in a network. By testing the
differences between observed bonding and bridging social capital
and what would be expected by chance in a network of organiza-
tions concerned about wildfire, this study provides insights on the
utility of a structural approach for investigating human capacity for
landscape-scale planning. The social network analysis methods we
use to assess social capacity for landscape planning in Oregon can be
replicated in other regions of the USA and the world where diverse
sets of stakeholder organizations seek to address natural resource
problems that operate on large spatial scales and where recognition
of the importance of cooperation across ownerships on manage-
ment is growing; for example in Australia, where landscape-scale
planning is gaining traction (Brunckhorst, 2011) including on the
problem of wildfire.

Acknowledgements
National Science Foundation’s Coupled Human and Natural
Systems Program (NSF Grant CNH-1013296) and the USDA For-
est Service PNW Research Station provided the funding for this
research. The authors would like to acknowledge all the interview

acer
Highlight



