



































































Propagating uncertainty to estimates of above-ground biomass for Kenyan mangroves: A scaling procedure from tree to landscape level


R. Cohen et al. / Forest Ecology and Management 310 (2013) 968–982 969
(Kirui et al., 2012). Continued degradation and loss of mangrove
cover not only represents a loss of future C sequestration potential
but could result in significant release into the atmosphere of C cur-
rently being stored by mangroves (Pendleton et al., 2012).

An estimated 8–20% of annual global anthropogenic CO2 emis-
sions result from land-use changes occurring primarily in the tro-
pics (van der Werf et al., 2009). This realisation has led to proposals
for forest-based climate change mitigation strategies such as Re-
duced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+). In
essence REDD+ envisages achieving CO2 emissions reductions, for-
est conservation and sustainable development by placing an eco-
nomic value on forest carbon storage and facilitating the transfer
of funds from developed to developing nations through interna-
tional trade in carbon credits. Details of how REDD+ will operate
at the national and international level under the United Nations
Framework Convention for Climate Change (UNFCCC) are still un-
der debate. However many developing nations (including Kenya)
are already in the process of formulating national REDD+ readiness
strategies in partnership with the World Bank’s Forest Carbon Part-
nership Facility (FCPF). There is definite scope for mangroves to be
included in national and/or local scale forest carbon projects oper-
ating either under existing voluntary or future compliance carbon
markets. Indeed, a recent study by Siikamaki et al. (2012) sug-
gested that at the global scale reducing CO2 emissions by avoiding
further loss of mangroves could prove to be an economically viable
option in comparison with the cost of reducing emissions from
other sources (e.g. industry) even under scenarios of low mangrove
carbon offset supply.

Participation in REDD+ (under the UNFCCC) will require coun-
tries to produce accurate estimates of their forest carbon stocks
and stock changes through robust Measurement, Reporting and
Verification (MRV) programs. The most recent Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Green-
house Gas Inventories (IPCC, 2006) provide the current methodo-
logical framework for REDD+ MRV requirements (Maniatis and
Mollicone, 2010). In accordance with these guidelines all estimates
should be accompanied by an appropriate measure of uncertainty
(95% confidence interval) and should account for and reduce all
known sources of uncertainty as far as is possible (IPCC, 2006).
Above-ground biomass (AGB) is one of five forest carbon pools
(identified by the IPCC) which will be estimable and reportable
for REDD+. Providing robust estimates of AGB is important both
in terms of future REDD+ reporting but also in providing the link
between ground and remote sensing efforts to monitor changes
in forest biomass and land cover at local, regional and global scales.

The above-ground biomass of trees is commonly estimated by
the use of allometric equations (derived using regression analysis)
which relate one or more easily measurable tree variables (e.g.,
stem diameter at breast height (DBH)) to total above-ground bio-
mass. These equations are then applied to forest inventory data
in order to estimate biomass at larger spatial scales. Allometric
equations have been developed for a variety of mangrove species
occurring across a broad geographical range (Clough and Scott,
1989; Kairo et al., 2009; Komiyama et al., 2005; Poungparn et al.,
2002; Soares and Schaeffer-Novelli, 2005). However, African man-
groves are under-represented in the current literature with pub-
lished equations existing for Kenya (Kairo et al., 2009; Kairo
et al., 2008; Kirui et al., 2006; Slim et al., 1996; Tamooh et al.,
2009) and South Africa (Steinke et al., 1995) only.

Allometric relationships in trees are generally considered to be
both species and site-specific. However, the infeasibility of con-
structing a new allometric equation for every species encountered
at every new site has led to increasing interest in the development
of generic equations for biomass estimation (Brown et al., 1989;
Chave et al., 2005; Zianis and Mencuccini, 2004). Existing generic
equations for mangroves have used wood density as the
species-specific component of the relationship (Chave et al., 2005;
Komiyama et al., 2005). The generic equation developed by Komiy-
ama et al. (2005) was deemed to perform within acceptable levels
of precision (as measured by the relative error) in comparison with
site-specific equations for selected species (Komiyama et al., 2008).

Uncertainties are introduced at all stages of the biomass estima-
tion process (from single tree to landscape level). Total uncertainty
at the single tree level is comprised of uncertainty in the measure-
ment of tree variables (measurement uncertainty) and uncertainty
due to the use of the allometric model for predicting the biomass
of a new individual (predictive uncertainty) (Chave et al., 2004;
Zianis, 2008). These uncertainties are, in turn, propagated to plot
and landscape level biomass estimates. Failing to account for uncer-
tainty during the biomass estimation process ultimately leads to an
underestimation of the uncertainty on final predictions (Dietze et al.,
2008).

Accounting for predictive uncertainty is particularly important in
biomass estimation as allometric equations are often applied out-
with the data range for which they were originally intended (Chave
et al., 2005) and are always applied outside the particular trees (and
often sites) from which they were developed. Uncertainty in the
parameters of a regression model is often represented by simply
quoting the standard error of the allometric constants whilst the
coefficient of determination (R2) is the usual means by which to
evaluate both the ‘fit’ of the model and its predictive power (e.g.
Komiyama et al., 2005; Soares and Schaeffer-Novelli, 2005). How-
ever, over reliance on the use of R2 in regression analysis as a mea-
sure of model predictive accuracy and for model comparison
(between datasets) has been criticised in recent years (Gelman
and Pardoe, 2006; Johnson and Omland, 2004). In contrast to model
selection criteria such as the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC)
(Akaike, 1987) the R2 statistic is not a direct measure of model pre-
dictive accuracy and model selection made solely on the basis of
maximising the R2 statistic can lead to imprecise predictions as no
account is taken of model complexity (Johnson and Omland, 2004).

The issue of uncertainty in biomass estimation has been ad-
dressed in the literature for forests in general (Brown, 2002; Chave
et al., 2004; Ketterings et al., 2001; Parresol, 1999; Phillips et al.,
2000; Zianis, 2008). Methodologies for propagating uncertainty
have been presented based on summing the variances of compo-
nent sources of uncertainty (see Chave et al., 2004; Ketterings
et al., 2001; Phillips et al., 2000) and simulation techniques such
as Monte Carlo (Heath and Smith, 2000; Ryan, 2009). To the best
of our knowledge such methodologies have never been applied
for the purpose of propagating uncertainty to biomass estimates
in mangroves. With this in mind and in the context of future
REDD+ requirements for biomass/carbon accounting this study fo-
cused on: (1) the development of new allometric equations to esti-
mate the above-ground biomass of Kenyan mangroves using linear
mixed-effects models and based on a meta-analysis of all the avail-
able harvest data for Kenyan mangrove species (2) demonstrating a
simulation based methodology for propagating uncertainty during
the biomass estimation process and (3) demonstrating the practi-
cal application of said equations and simulations to a large forest
inventory dataset spanning the entire Kenyan coastline for the pur-
pose of producing estimates of above-ground biomass at different
spatial scales (tree, plot, region and landscape) with an appropriate
measure of uncertainty.
2. Methods

2.1. Harvest dataset – model development and validation

The harvest data used in this study is detailed in Table 1 and
represents the largest dataset compiled to date for African

acer
Highlight

acer
Highlight



